=== Brazilian guidelines for the clinical management of paracoccidioidomycosis ===
Fonte: Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 2017;50(4):1-26
URL: https://www.scielo.br/j/rsbmt/a/Ynd6SxcPqLjtqkFyVp678zj/?format=pdf&lang=en
Licenca: CC BY 4.0
Doenca: pcm | Idioma: en
----------------------------------------------------------------------

715
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017
doi: 10.1590/0037-8682-0230-2017
Consensus
Brazilian guidelines for the clinical management of
paracoccidioidomycosis
Maria Aparecida Shikanai-Yasuda[1], Rinaldo Pôncio Mendes[2], Arnaldo Lopes Colombo[3],
Flávio de Queiroz-Telles[4], Adriana Satie Gonçalves Kono[5], Anamaria M. M. Paniago[6],
André Nathan[7], Antonio Carlos Francisconi do Valle[8], Eduardo Bagagli[9],
Gil Benard[10], Marcelo Simão Ferreira[11], Marcus de Melo Teixeira[12],
Mario León Silva-Vergara[13], Ricardo Mendes Pereira[14], Ricardo de Souza Cavalcante[2],
Rosane Hahn[15], Rui Rafael Durlacher[16], Zarifa Khoury[17], Zoilo Pires de Camargo[18],
Maria Luiza Moretti[19], and Roberto Martinez[20]
Corresponding author: Profa. Maria Aparecida Shikanai-Yasuda.
email: masyasuda@yahoo.com.br
Received 01 June 2017
Accepted 30 June 2017
Abstract
Paracoccidioidomycosis is a systemic fungal disease occurring in Latin America that is associated with rural environments and
agricultural activities. However, the incidence and prevalence of paracoccidiodomycosis is underestimated because of the lack
of compulsory notification. If paracoccidiodomycosis is not diagnosed and treated early and adequately, the endemic fungal
infection could result in serious sequelae. While the Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (P. brasiliensis) complex has been known to
be the causal agent of paracoccidiodomycosis, a new species, Paracoccidioides lutzii (P. lutzii), has been reported in Rondônia,
where the disease has reached epidemic levels, and in the Central West and Pará. Accurate diagnoses and availability of antigens
that are reactive with the patients’ sera remain significant challenges. Therefore, the present guidelines aims to update the first
Brazilian consensus on paracoccidioidomycosis by providing evidence-based recommendations for bedside patient management.
This consensus summarizes etiological, ecoepidemiological, molecular epidemiological, and immunopathological data, with
emphasis on clinical, microbiological, and serological diagnosis and management of clinical forms and sequelae, as well as in
patients with comorbidities and immunosuppression. The consensus also includes discussion of outpatient treatments, severe
disease forms, disease prevalence among special populations and resource-poor settings, a brief review of prevention and control
measures, current challenges and recommendations.
Keywords: Paracoccidioidomycosis. Guidelines. Clinical management. Diagnosis. Treatment follow-up.
[1]. Departamento de Moléstias Infecciosas e Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
[2]. Departamento de Doenças Tropicais e Diagnóstico por Imagem, Faculdade de Medicina Botucatu, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brasil. [3].
Departamento de Medicina, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil. [4]. Departamento de Saúde Comunitária,
Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brasil. [5]. Divisão de Moléstias Infecciosas, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil. [6]. Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul, Campo Grande, MS, Brasil. [7]. Divisão de
Pneumologia, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
[8]. Instituto de Pesquisa Clínica Evandro Chagas, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil. [9]. Departamento de Microbiologia e Imunologia,
Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brasil. [10]. Departamento de Dermatologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil. [11]. Serviço de Infectologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Uberlândia, Uberlândia, MG, Brasil.
[12]. Translational Genomics Research Institute, Northern Arizona University, AZ, USA. [13]. Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro, Uberaba, MG. Brasil. [14]. Departamento de Pediatria, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual
de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brasil. [15]. Núcleo de Doenças Infecciosas e Tropicais, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso,
Cuiabá, MT, Brasil. [16]. Centro de Medicina Tropical de Rondônia, Porto Velho, RO, Brasil. [17]. Instituto de Infectologia Emílio Ribas, Secretaria de Estado
da Saúde de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil. [18]. Departamento de Microbiologia e Imunologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
[19]. Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brasil.
[20]. Departamento de Clínica Médica, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brasil.

716
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines
PS2
PS3
Pl
S1a
S1b
PS4
FIGURE 1 - Geographic distribution of Paracoccidioides lutzii and
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis cryptic species. Modified (update on P. lutzii
distribution) from: Muñoz JF, Farrer RA, Desjardins CA, Gallo JE, Sykes S,
Sakthikumar S, et al. Genome diversity, recombination, and virulence across
the major lineages of Paracoccidioides. mSphere 2016; 1(5): e00213-163. PS2;
PS3; PS4; S1a; S1b: phylogenetic species of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis; Pl:
Paracoccidioides lutzii.
ETIOLOGY
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is caused by thermo-
dimorphic fungi that currently encompasses two species:
Paracoccidoides brasiliensis (P. brasiliensis) and
Paracoccidioides lutzii (P. lutzii)1. P. brasiliensis contains a
complex of at least five phylogenetic clusters ranked as the
following phylogenetic species: S1a, S1b, PS2, PS3, and PS42,3,4.
The phylogenetic species S1a and S1b are predominantly found
in lower South America, especially in southeastern and southern
Brazil, Argentina, and Paraguay. The PS2 species has a sporadic
distribution and is less frequently reported, with human cases
only being reported thus far in Venezuela and southeast Brazil
(Figure 1). The PS3 and PS4 species are exclusively endemic
to Colombia and Venezuela, respectively. P. lutzii encompasses
a single species and is predominantly distributed in the Central
West and Amazon regions of Brazil and Ecuador1,5,6,7,8. However,
the real incidence of each phylogenetic species and its implication
on clinical practice is difficult to establish because of the lack
of guided studies comparing PCM forms and manifestations
with their genetic background9. Radial immunodiffusion
against the commonly used exoantigens containing a 43-kDa
glycoprotein (gp43) suggests that Paracoccidiodes spp. exhibit
major antigenic variability. According to phylogenetic studies,
different Paracoccidioides spp. isolates are distributed in
different genotypes across multiple PCM endemic areas of
Latin America. In particular, Paracoccidioides spp. in central
Brazil (i.e. Mato Grosso and Rondônia) exhibit a lower rate of
genetic similarity. Yet, P. lutzii isolates exhibit high species-
specific antigen variability9, which has already been assessed
in proteomic studies.
ECOEPIDEMIOLOGY
In nature, P. brasiliensis and P. lutzii develop as filamentous
structures and produce infective propagules called conidia10,11
(Figure 2). If inhaled, the propagules give rise to yeast forms of
the fungus that become parasitic to the host. Paracoccidioides
spp. can cause infection and disease in humans and domestic
and wild animals, although only a few active disease cases have
been observed in animals, such as dogs10,12. The armadillo is
known to be a reservoir of P. brasiliensis, and the fungus can
be easily cultured from the animal’s internal organs (spleen,
liver, and lymph nodes), indicating a systemic process. P. lutzii
has not yet been isolated from armadillos.
Epidemic outbreaks of PCM have never been observed.
Further, fungal recovery (culture) directly from the fungi’s
environmental saprophytic form has been shown to be
particularly difficult to obtain with reproducibility. Thus, the
region where the disease is acquired is referred to as reservaria.
Yet, sensitive molecular screening techniques have detected the
fungus in soils and aerosols, especially among samples taken
from animal burrows or sites with medium to high moisture
content protected by vegetation cover13.
In recent decades, changes in the demographic characteristics
and geographical distribution of PCM incidence have been
observed. These shifts could be attributed to the rise of
urbanization, application of diagnostic methods, and the
presence of comorbidities and immunosuppression. In addition,
environmental factors, such as the expansion of settlements,
clearing of forests, and increased coffee production, could
contribute to the current high levels of PCM incidence in some
regions of Rondônia14.
In addition, between 1982 and 1983, a region of Southeast
Brazil experienced climatic changes related to El Niño, resulting
in elevated soil moisture levels and temperatures between
18-28ºC, which are favorable for fungal sporulation and aerial
dispersion. During this same time period, the region experienced
an outbreak of acute cases of PCM15.
How is Paracoccidioides infection acquired?
The major risk factor for acquiring infection is a profession
or activity related to the management of soil contaminated with
the fungus, such as agriculture, earthworks, soil preparation,
gardening, and transportation of vegetable products (Figure 2).
In a majority of all PCM infection cases the patients had been
exposed to agricultural activities during the first two decades of
their life, at which point they likely acquired the infection even

717
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017
Environment
Hosts
Coffee and sugar cane plantation /  rural workers
Inhalation of arthroconidia
Armadillo (Pb) (Pl?)
immunotolerant / signalling
Agriculture activities / Climate conditions (soil humidity)
Human beings
predominance of infection
predisposing factors for disease
genetic
gender (male)
great inoculum
Yeast phase
(body temperature)
Animals – infection; rare
cases of disease
P. lutzii
P. brasiliensis
Mendes & Bagagli
FIGURE 2 - Spread of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis and Paracoccidioides lutzii. Pb: Paracoccidioides brasiliensis; Pl: Paracoccidioides lutzii.
if clinical manifestations appeared many years later11. Most of
these patients seeked medical attention many years after they
left the endemic area and resided in urban centers where were
engaged in other activities unrelated to soil management. For
example, smoking (> 20 cigarettes/day for > 20 years) and
alcoholism (> 50g/day)16 are frequently associated with mycosis.
Unlike other mycoses, such as cryptococcosis, disseminated
histoplasmosis, and candidiasis, PCM is not usually related
to immunosuppressive diseases. However, cases of PCM
associated with HIV infection, neoplasia and, more rarely,
organ transplants and use of immunobiologicals have been
reported17-20.
Incidence, prevalence and mortality
Since PCM is not a compulsory notification disease,
we do not have precise data on its incidence in Brazil.
Mycosis prevalence, incidence, and morbidity estimates are
based on reports from epidemiological surveys, case series,
hospitalization records, and mortality data21. Based on the
experiences of reference services caring for patients with PCM,
the disease’s incidence in endemic areas ranges from three to
four new cases per one million inhabitants and one to three new
cases per 100,000 inhabitants per year. About 80% of PCM cases
are registered in Brazil, particularly in the States of São Paulo,
Paraná, Rio Grande do Sul, Goiás, and Rondônia (Figure 3)21. In
Latin America, cases are most frequently reported in Argentina,
Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Paraguay. Estimates of
annual incidence in Brazil range from 0.71 to 3.7 cases per
100,000 inhabitants21. However, recent records of incidence in
Rondônia report 9.4 cases per 100,000 inhabitants, with two
municipalities reporting incidences close to 40 cases per 100,000
inhabitants14. Between 1980 and 1995, the Ministry of Health
documented 3,181 cases of PCM-related deaths, resulting in a
PCM mortality rate of 1.45 cases per one million inhabitants
(2.59 for the South, 2.35 for the Midwest, 1.81 for the Southeast,
1.08 for the North, and 0.2 for the northeast regions)22. In this
study, among all chronic infectious and parasitic disease, PCM
was listed as the eighth highest cause of mortality and had the
highest mortality rate among the systemic mycoses, even having
a higher mortality rate than leishmaniasis. Recent data collected
from 13,683 patients who were hospitalized with systemic
mycoses between January 1998 and December 2006 showed
that PCM accounts for the largest number of hospitalizations
(49%) among all mycoses23, with emphasis on hospitalization
rates in the north and Midwest regions, without major difference
in the mortality of hospitalized patients (Figure 3).
Age group and distribution between genders
PCM infection is primarily acquired in the first two decades
of life, with a peak incidence between 10 and 20 years of age.
However, the presentation of clinical manifestations or evolution
to disease is uncommon in this age group. Instead, PCM
occurs more frequently in adults between the ages of 30- and
50-years-old as a result of endogenous latent foci reactivation10.
Although the frequency of PCM cases ranges between regions,
an estimated 10% of PCM cases occur in individuals under the

718
CW
SE
S
N
NE
Acre
Rondônia
Mato
Grosso
Goiás
Para
Maranhão
Tocantins
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Paraná
Rio Grande
do Sul
BRAZIL (states)
FIGURE 3 - Geographical areas of paracoccidioidomycosis endemicity in Latin America. Reproduction from: Martinez R. New trends in Epidemiology. J Fungi.
2017;3(1):121.
(■) first recognized areas of high endemicity
(■) high endemicity observed since the last decades of the 20th century
(■) areas with some recent evidence of increasing endemicity
(■) areas of moderate endemicity
(■) low endemicity
(  ) no cases or rare cases of paracoccidioidomycosis report in these
countries or regions
age of 20-years-old, while the remaining 90% occurring later in
life. Further, in childhood, the frequency of PCM cases is evenly
distributed between both genders, with a slight predominance in
young male adults; however, in adulthood, the frequency ranges
from ten to 15 men for one woman.
IMMUNOPATHOGENESIS
Control of Paracoccidioides spp infection depends on the
host´s cellular immune response, with T cells playing a prominent
role. PCM has a range of clinical presentations along a spectrum,
with each one being potentially associated with a specific T cell
immunity pattern24. Most infected individuals living in endemic
areas will not develop any illness. These individuals exhibit a
T-helper [Th-1] immune response pattern characterized by the
release of cytokines that activate macrophages, TCD4+, and
TCD8+ cells, resulting in the formation of compact granulomas
and control of fungal replication25,26; however, dormant forms
of the fungus may still exist inside these granulomas. The few
individuals who do develop the disease most likely had deficient
Th-1 responses, with the extent of the failure correlating with
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

719
disease severity25,26. In fact, patients with infections that evolve
to the more severe forms, such as the acute/subacute form
disease (A) or eventually the severe disseminated chronic
form (CF), develop Th-2 and Th-9 immune response patterns
that do not form compact granulomas, but instead activate
B lymphocytes, high levels of specific antibodies, including the
the IgE subclass, hypergammaglobulinemia, and eosinophilia27.
Patients with the severe/disseminated unifocal or multifocal
CF who bear lower fungal burdens, also exhibit deficient Th-1
responses, often at a lesser degree that that of patients with
the AF or severe disseminated CF. In addition, these patients
can still experience the formation of compact granulomas
that can suppress, at least partially, fungal replication25,26. In
these patients, the loss of Th-1 function would be partially
compensated by the development of Th-17 and Th-22 responses,
both of which drive intense mucosal inflammatory responses
rich in neutrophils27. In fact, a characteristic feature of the CF
is the involvement of the mucosa, especially in the respiratory
tract. In addition, it has been demonstrated that regulatory
T cells (Tregs) suppress T cell immunity and contribute to the
T cell anergy observed in the more severe forms of the disease28,29.
The factors that determine the different outcomes of the
PCM host-parasite interaction remain unknown. Preliminary
data suggest that the host’s immunogenetic background may
play a role30. Regardless, clinical experiences have indicated
that treatment of PCM should persist for long periods until
effective cellular immune responses are elicited. However, for
unknown reasons, yeast cells may remain in quiescent foci that
can reactivate the disease and cause relapses. Usually, immune
alterations subside with treatment and the protective Th-1
responses appear/reappear. This observation is corroborated
by in vitro experiments that have demonstrated deficient Th-1
responses can be reverted31, although this response reconstitution
has not been shown to reach the magnitude of that observed in
healthy individuals without disease32. The role of the observed
high serum levels of specific antibodies in any mechanism of
protection could not yet be determined.
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINICAL FORMS
AND ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY
PCM can compromise any organ, apparatus or system, as
revealed in Table 133,34, which presents clinical and autopsy
findings. Further, PCM’s diversification tends to hinder its
classification.
Several classifications of PCM clinical forms have been published
based on different criteria, such as lesion topography, disease natural
history, severity of clinical presentation, and serological reaction
results. This consensus adopted the classification presented in the
International Colloquium on Paracoccidioidomycosis held in
February 1986 in Medellin, Colombia35.
I.Paracoccidioidomycosis infection
II.Paracoccidioidomycosis (disease)
A. Acute/subacute form (juvenile)
•	- Moderate
•	- Severe
B. Chronic form (adult)
•	- Mild
•	- Moderate
•	- Severe
III. Residual form or sequelae
Paracoccidioidomycosis infection
Paracoccidioidomycosis infection is contracted when a
healthy individual comes into contact with a Paracoccidioides
spp. The infection is diagnosed by a positive intradermal reaction
to specific antigens and necropsy findings of latent fungi36.
Clinical forms of Paracoccidioidomycosis
Acute/subacute form (juvenile)
The acute/subacute form of PCM is responsible for 5-25%
of cases and may be more frequent in certain endemic regions
while almost never observed in others. In Brazil, this form is
more commonly observed in the following States: Maranhão,
Minas Gerais, Pará, Goiás, and São Paulo.
The incidence of PCM appears to be declining in some
endemic areas37. Acute/subacute PCM predominantly affects
children, adolescents, and young adults, but can occur in adults
between the ages of 30- and 40-years-old. The incidence of
PCM tends to be evenly distributed between genders, especially
among the adolescent population33,37-39.
This clinical form of PCM rapidly evolves and disseminates
the infection to multiple organs and systems. In general,
patients are diagnosed within a few weeks of symptoms
onset. Most symptoms involve the phagocytic-mononuclear
system, including the presence of localized or generalized
lymphadenomegaly, which may present suppuration, fistulization,
and hepatosplenomegaly. Symptoms may also include digestive
manifestations, cutaneous (or mucosal) lesions, osteoarticular
involvement, and rarely, pulmonary involvement. Fever, weight
loss, and anorexia often accompany the clinical presentation.
Intra-abdominal lymphadenomegaly may coalesce, producing
tumor masses that exert compression on various organs, such
as the bile duct and intestinal loops38 (Figure 4 and Figure 5).
A prominent finding of laboratory alterations in this form is
peripheral eosinophilia, which occurs in 30% to 50% of cases38-40.
Under certain conditions, eosinophilia may be significant (up to
70% of peripheral blood leukocytes).
Chronic form (adult)
The majority (74% to 96%) of PCM cases are in chronic
form, which typically manifests in adults between the ages of
30- and 60-years-old (male to female ratio: 22:1). Chronic PCM
initiates slowly and the symptoms often persist beyond 4 to 6
months, possibly even a year. In some cases, PCM develops
without any physical indication, and the infection is only caught
when the individual goes for a routine check-up or labor-related
physical examinations. In 90% of patients with PCM, pulmonary
impairment is observed41,42. After the lungs, the organs most
affected by PCM are the mucosa of the upper aerodigestive
pathway and skin (Figure 6 and Figure 7).
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

720
Organs
Clinical manifestation
Necropsies
Belissimo-Rodrigues
et al [33]*
Franco et al [34]**
Franco et al [34]**
n
%
n
%
n
%
Lungs
778
63.8
128
74.0
24
96.0
Bronchus/trachea
5
0.4
.
.
.
Lymphadenomegaly
generalized
localized
618
342
276
28.1
22.6
63
36.4
18
72.0
Mouth, pharynx, larynx
oral mucosa
larynx
610
196
50.0
16.1
83
48.0
15
60.0
nasal mucosa
19
1.6
Adrenals
26
2.1
6
3.5
11
44.0
Central Nervous System (CNS)
42
3.4
1
0.6
9
36.0
Liver
0
0.0
8
32.0
Spleen
57
4.7
0
0.0
7
28.0
Skin
361
29.6
22
12.7
6
24.0
Kidney
0
0.0
4
16.0
Bone marrow
0
0.0
3
12.0
Heart
0
0.0
3
12.0
Digestive tract
92
7.5
6
6.5
2
8.0
Testicles
9
0.7
1
0.6
2
8.0
Prostate
1
0.6
2
8.0
Eyes
2
1.2
0
0.0
Breast
1
0.6
0
0.0
Osteoarticular
27
2.2
TABLE 1
Organs affected in paracoccidioidomycosis.
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 4 - Acute form of PCM in children. A. Abscesses in frontal and clavicular regions resulting from osteo-articular involvement. B. Female child presenting
with abscessed lymphatic involvement. C. Inguinal lymphoadenomegaly. D. Lymphatic-abdominal involvement with ascites and hepatosplenomegaly. PCM:
paracoccidioidomycosis. Reproduction with modification: Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Telles Filho F de Q, Mendes RP, Colombo AL, Moretti ML, Grupo de Consultores
do Consenso em Paracoccidioidomicose. Consenso Brasileiro em Paracoccidioidomicose. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006;39(3):297-31039.
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines
*1,219 patients of the Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo (USP). ** 173 patients and 25 necropsies at the Faculdade de
Medicina de Botucatu, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP).

721
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 5 - Patients with the acute/subacute (juvenile) form of PCM. A. Ganglionic mass in supraclavicular, cervical, and submandibular region. B.
Lymphadenomegaly of PCM, which must be differentiated from hematological diseases, such as lymphoma. C. Verrucous ulcerative lesions on the face and
pavilion caused by hematogenous dissemination. D. Papulonodular ulcerative lesions caused by hematogenous dissemination. PCM: paracoccidioidomycosis.
Reproduction with modification: Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Telles Filho F de Q, Mendes RP, Colombo AL, Moretti ML, Grupo de Consultores do Consenso em
Paracoccidioidomicose. Consenso Brasileiro em Paracoccidioidomicose. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006;39(3):297-31039.
A
B
FIGURE 6 - Oral involvement in chronic PCM 47,48. A. Gingivostomatitis.
B. Moriform stomatitis of Aguiar-Pupo. The lesions may present as extensive,
ulcers, or ulcer-vegetative, with characteristic hemorrhagic dots (moriform
lesion). Although infrequent, the lesions may extend into the nasal vestibule,
causing perforation of the palate and nasal septum, with inaesthetic and
functional sequelae. In acute PCM, the oral mucosa is not frequently involved.
PCM: paracoccidioidomycosis. Reproduction with modification: Shikanai-
Yasuda MA, Telles Filho F de Q, Mendes RP, Colombo AL, Moretti ML, Grupo
de Consultores do Consenso em Paracoccidioidomicose. Consenso Brasileiro
em Paracoccidioidomicose. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006;39(3):297-31039.
Chronic PCM can be classified as either mild, moderate, or
severe35. Severe cases are defined by meeting three or more of the
following criteria: a) weight loss greater than 10% of the normal
body weight; b) intense pulmonary involvement; c) involvement of
other organs, such as adrenal glands, central nervous system, and
bones; d) the presence of lymph nodes affected in multiple chains
in superficial or deep, pseudotumoral form (>2.0cm in diameter,
without suppuration) or suppurative form; e) high antibody titers.
In fact, severe cases are represented by patients presenting
clinical instability due to respiratory insufficiency, adrenal
dysfunction, neurological syndrome or acute abdomen.
Mild cases, which constitute a small portion of patients, are those
with weight loss below 5% of normal body weight and involvement
of unique or a few organs or tissues without disfunction.
In some cases, patients present with clinical manifestations
of both acute/subacute and chronic forms, making it difficult
to properly classify the disease. Most of these patients present
with intense suppression of cellular immunity and are labelled
as having mixed form PCM43.
Residual forms (sequelae)
Residual forms, also referred to as sequelae, are clinical
manifestations of anatomical and functional changes observed
FIGURE 7 - Clinical aspects of chronic PCM. A. Papulonodular ulcerative lesions on the face. B. Perioral and mentonian involvement. C. Fistulated cervical
and submandibular lymph nodes. D. Vegetative lesion with irregular borders in the perianal region. Through hematogenous dissemination, especially traumatic
fungal implantation, the cutaneous lesions contiguously develop from compromised mucosa, fistulated lymph nodes, or bone involvement47. The lesions are
characterized by ulcero-crusted polymorphisms, molluscoids, papules, or acneiforms, and are located primarily in the cephalic pole and periorificial regions48.
Of note, patients with Addison's syndrome typically present with cutaneous and mucosal hyperpigmentation. PCM: paracoccidioidomycosis. Reproduction with
modification: Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Telles Filho FQ, Mendes RP, Colombo AL, Moretti ML, Grupo de Consultores do Consenso em Paracoccidioidomicose.
Consenso Brasileiro em Paracoccidioidomicose. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006;39(3):297-31039.
after PCM treatment. Sequelae are observed in multiple organs,
but have a higher rate of incidence in the lungs, skin, larynx,
trachea, adrenals, mucosa of the upper aerodigestive tract,
central nervous system, and lymphatic system, thus explaining
the diversity of clinical presentation44-46.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017
A
B
C
D

722
INITIAL TREATMENT, DIAGNOSTIC
APPROACH, AND OUTPATIENT
FOLLOW-UP ROUTINE OF PATIENTS
WITH PCM
Since PCM is systemic, any organ can be affected. The
attention of the observer should initially be directed to the
general condition of the patient and then the organs and systems
that are most frequently committed according to the forms of
the disease presentation: acute/subacute PCM and chronic
PCM. According to routine medical care, all patients should
have a detailed physical examination, reporting weight and
height evaluation, to allow the characterization of nutritional
status.
General evaluation of a patient with
acute/subacute form
In
acute/subacute
PCM,
anamnesis
and
physical
examination play an important role in the determination of
disease severity and systemic involvement. For example, the
presence of lymphadenomegaly in various lymphatic chains,
hepatosplenomegaly, cutaneous lesions, or abdominal masses
can be confirmed during a patient’s physical examination. In
addition, clinical examination can also detect the presence
of jaundice, ascites, and peripheral edema, which prompt
investigation of hypoalbuminemia. In acute/subacute PCM,
signs of adrenal and neurological involvement are rare. Fever,
weight loss, and digestive complaints, such as abdominal pain,
chronic malabsorptive diarrhea, and vomiting, are also quite
frequent40. The presence of tumefaction or pain in the bone
region requires the identification of bone lesions.
Laboratory tests and imaging:
Chest X-ray (posterior, anterior, profile)
Complete blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Liver biochemical tests (alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
alkaline phosphatase)
Total proteins and fractions
Evaluation of renal and metabolic function (serum creatinine, Na, K)
Imaging tests, such as ultrasound, CT, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), and scintigraphic mapping should only be
performed when there is clinical suspicion or laboratory results
suggestive of organ involvement that cannot be solely assessed
by physical examination.
General evaluation of a patient with chronic form
In chronic PCM, anamnesis and physical examination
must include the evaluation of signs and symptoms related
to pulmonary, tegumentary, and laryngeal involvement41,46
(cough, dyspnea, mucus/purulent expectoration, ulcerated
lesions of the skin and naso-oropharyngeal mucosa47,48,
odynophagia, dysphagia, and dysphonia). Both diagnostic
methods must also evaluate signs and symptoms of lymphatic
adenomegaly, adrenal involvement49,50 (asthenia, weight
loss, hypotension, skin darkening, abdominal pain), central
nervous system involvement51,52 (headache, motor deficit,
convulsive syndrome, and alteration of behavior and/or level
of consciousness), and digestive impairment (diarrhea and
malabsorption syndrome)53,54 (Figure 8).
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 8 - Images of PCM. A. Conventional butterfly wing radiological
image showing bilateral, parahilar, and symmetrical pulmonary involvement
with a predominance of alveolar lesions, sparing apices and lower thirds. These
manifestations are very suggestive of PCM but occur infrequently. B. Diffuse and
symmetric nodular and micronodular opacities. C. Computed tomography (CT) of
lungs with multiple sub-pleural cavities. Pulmonary lesions may be interstitial of the
thin or coarse reticular-nodular type, or, less frequently of the tumor type. D. Bilateral
adrenal increase. E and F. CNS: hypodense and ring-shaped contrast enhancement
images with small mass effect. PCM: paracoccidioidomycosis. Reproduction with
modification: Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Telles Filho F de Q, Mendes RP, Colombo AL,
Moretti ML, Grupo de Consultores do Consenso em Paracoccidioidomicose. Consenso
Brasileiro em Paracoccidioidomicose. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006; 39(3): 297-31039.
Laboratory tests and imaging
Chest X-rays (posterior, anterior, profile)
Complete blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Liver biochemical tests (ALT, alkaline phosphatase)
Evaluation of renal and metabolic function (serum creatinine, Na, K)
More complex examinations should be conducted if there
is a clinical suspicion or laboratory result suggesting central
nervous system involvement, gastrointestinal involvement,
abdominal forms, chronic respiratory insufficiencies, or
osteo-articular lesions. In patients presenting with these signs,
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

723
imagining and functional tests should be performed under
the guidance of medical experts. Given the high frequency of
adrenal involvement and its clinical impact, patients suspected
of having chronic PCM should undergo an assessment of the
functional reserve when available.
Differential diagnosis
Other conditions to consider in the differential diagnosis
for PCM include the following: acute lymphoma, leukemia,
histoplasmosis,
tuberculosis,
toxoplasmosis,
visceral
leishmaniasis, and infectious mononucleosis. For chronic
cutaneous-mucosal PCM, the conditions to consider in the
differential diagnosis are cutaneous or mucosal leishmaniasis,
tuberculosis, chromoblastomycosis, leprosy, sarcoidosis, lues,
neoplasia and in the chronic pulmonary form, tuberculosis
(Table 2)55, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, sarcoidosis,
pneumoconiosis, and interstitial pneumonitis. For digestive
Epidemiology
Tuberculosis
Paracoccidioidomycosis
Age
Wide range
Restricted (30- to 60-years-old)
Gender
Indistinct
Prevalent in males (15:1)**
Incidence
45/100,000
1-3/100,000
Mortality
2.3/100,000
1.65/1,000,000
Geographic distribution
Worldwide, more urban
Latin America, more rural
Microbiology
etiologic agent
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Paracoccidioides spp.
source of infections
Man/animal
Soil
infection
Contagious
Non-contagious
cultivation
Fastidious
Fastidious
Clinical aspects
signs and symptoms
Well defined
Non-specific
weight loss
++/++++
++/++++
fever
++++
+/-***
cough
++++
+/-
hemoptoic sputum
+++/++++
+/-
pleural involvement
Yes
No
association
PCM (10-15%)
TB (10-15%)
Radiology
image localization
Predominance in upper zone
Predominance in medium thirds, bilateral, and
diffuse zones
cavities
+++/++++
++/++++
pleural images
Yes
No
dissemination
Uni/multifocal
Uni/multifocal
Laboratorial changes
red cells
Normocytic normochromic anemia
Normocytic normochromic anemia
white cells
Leukocytosis/leukopenia
Leukocytosis/leukopenia
ESR
+++/++++
+/++
serum proteins
Normal/low
Normal/low
Natural evolution
+++
+++
consumption
Yes
Yes
anergy
Yes
Yes
death
Yes
Yes
* Modified from: Queiroz-Telles F and Escuissato D. Pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;32:764-7455. **Pneumonia may occur
rarely in acute/subacute PCM. In these cases, both sexes can be affected; ***Fever may occur in patients with associated infections. PCM: paracoccidioidomycosis;
TB: tuberculosis; ESR: erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
TABLE 2
Pulmonary involvement: differences between tuberculosis and paracoccidioidomycosis*.
PCM, conditions to consider in the differential diagnosis are
tuberculosis and Chron’s disease, while for forms of PCM
that affect the central nervous system, the conditions are
tuberculosis, cryptococcosis, cysticercosis, and neoplasias.
Laboratory examinations for specific diagnosis
The identification of Paracoccidioides spp. through the
examination of fresh sputum or other clinical specimens, such
as lesion sample, lymph node aspiration, or biopsy fragment,
is the gold standard for PCM diagnosis.
Aspects of PCM laboratory diagnosis are presented in
Figure 9.
In an attempt to standardized PCM diagnosis, the following
definitions are offered:
Suspected case: patient presents with one or more of the
following manifestations, excluding tuberculosis and other
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

724
diseases that occur with a similar condition, for at least four
weeks:
•	 Cough with or without sputum and dyspnea
•	 Sialorrhea, odynophagia, or hoarseness
•	 Lesion (ulcerated) in the nasal or oral mucosa
•	 Skin lesions (ulcers, vegetation, nodules, plaques, etc.)
•	 Cervical or generalized adenomegaly, with or without
suppuration and fistulization.
•	 Child or young adult with hepatosplenomegaly and/or
abdominal tumefaction
Probable case: a patient with clinical manifestations
compatible with PCM and anti-P. brasiliensis/P. lutzii serum
antibody titers detected preferably  by quantitative double
immunodiffusion test or counterimmunoelectrophoresis.
Confirmed case: Patient with clinical manifestations
compatible with PCM with secretions, bodily fluids, or
lesion material presenting with fungal elements suggestive
of P. brasiliensis/P. lutzii infection (Figure 9). Note, the
micromorphology of P. brasiliensis/P. lutzii parasitic forms in
the biological material of infected patients cannot distinguish
between the two species. Therefore, the identification of the
involved species requires culture isolation and application of
molecular techniques56,57.
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 9 - Laboratory diagnosis of paracoccidioidomycosis. A and B.
Cultivation of P. brasiliensis. A. mycelial phase. B. yeast phase. C. Fresh
examination in KOH. D. Lactophenol staining showing yeast cells with multiple
buds. E. Histological section stained by the Grocott method. F. Histological
section stained by PAS. KOH: Potassium hydroxide; PAS: Periodic acid - Schiff
stain. Reproduction with modification: Shikanai-Yasuda, MA, Telles Filho F de
Q, Mendes RP, Colombo AL, Moretti ML, Grupo de Consultores do Consenso
em Paracoccidioidomicose. Consenso Brasileiro em Paracoccidioidomicose.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006;39(3):297-31039.
Critical evaluation of serological tests:
serologic diagnosis and follow-up
Specific serological tests are important in not only the
diagnosis of PCM, but also in the assessment of host response to
specific treatments. Currently, double immunodiffusion (DID),
counterimmunoelectrophoresis
(CIE),
immunoenzymatic
assays (ELISA), and immunoblots (IB) are the serological
tests available in different reference services58-60.
These tests use standardized techniques and adequate
antigens61, and display a sensitivity between 80% and 95%.
The titer of specific anti-P. brasiliensis antibodies58,59,60
correlates with the severity of the clinical forms, with higher
levels detected in the acute/subacute and disseminated forms.
In cases of PCM caused by P. lutzii, such information remains
unknown, which has motivated multicenter studies in endemic
areas. PCM cases with false negative results from any of the
previously mentioned tests are most often associated with very
localized lesions and hosts with AIDS or immunodepressive
conditions. Antigens prepared from P. brasiliensis that are
rich in gp43KDA62 have excellent accuracy in the diagnosis
of P. brasiliensis infections58-60 , but have a low sensitivity
in the diagnosis of P. lutzii infections63,64. These serological
tests display a specificity between 85% and 100%, with
immunodiffusion having the highest rate of specificity.
False-positive reactions may occur in sera from patients with
histoplasmosis, and eventually aspergillosis and leishmaniasis;
however, gel immunodiffusion provides the highest rate of
specificity for these conditions.
Currently, the main method of PCM serological diagnosis
is double agar gel immunodiffusion (DID) because of its
simplicity, cost-effectiveness, sensitivity (>80%), specificity
(>90%), and extensive application over the last decades. For
DID, or any other test used in the diagnosis of PCM, serums
should be titrated to increase the accuracy of therapeutic
response interpretation because antibody titers progressively
decrease with successful clinical control. To meet serological
cure criteria, negative or stabilization results at a dilution of
1:2 or less should be achieved. In certain cases, patients may
already have titers below 1:4 upon diagnosis; therefore, the
serological criteria will have limited value during treatment
follow-up. Additional resources and techniques for PCM
diagnosis have been developed, but they are not available
for PCM routine assessment. These examinations include the
immunoblot technique, the triage ELISA test, the detection of
specific antigens and PCR65,66.
To date, there are no validated serological techniques for
the accurate diagnosis of infection by P. lutzii. Unfortunately,
there is no commercial system available for PCM diagnosis,
and all available tests are based on systems developed in
house58-60,63,64. A recent study revealed a large variability in
the mycosis diagnostic results generated by serological tests
performed at different reference laboratories67. Thus, to ensure
precise assessment, follow-up serological response curves
to antifungal treatments should be performed by the same
technique and laboratory.
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

725
Frequency of outpatient visits and completion of
examinations
During the first 3 months of infection, monthly
consultations are recommended to optimize patient adherence
to the established regimen, to assess drug tolerability, and
to ensure good clinical response (Table 3). If a satisfactory
clinical response is observed, the consultations should become
quarterly until the end of the first year. After 90 days of follow-
up if a satisfactory clinical response is observed, patients
should undergo complete blood count and biochemical
tests every 3 months during the first year. Radiological and
serological examinations should be requested every 6 months,
or at shorter intervals if a satisfactory clinical response is
not observed or if laboratory results indicate no change in
activity. The reduction of specific antibody titers should occur
approximately 6 months after treatment and should be either
negative or stabilized at low titers for approximately 10 to
24 months after treatment. These estimations depend on the
Examinations
1st medical
appointment
1st, 2nd,
3rd month
6th, 9th,
12th monh
18th,
24th
month
≥ 2 years
6/6 months
>1 year after
treatment
interruption: 6/6
months*
Medical
appointment
X
X
X
X
X
X
Hemogram,
ALT, Alkaline
phosphatase
Na, K creatinine
X
3rd month
X
X
X
X
Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate
X
X
Serology
X
6th,
12th
18th,
24th
X
X
Thorax X-ray
X
X
6th,
12th
X*
X*
If necessary**
TABLE 3
Guidance for clinical-laboratory follow-up of patients with paracoccidioidomycosis undergoing therapy.
ALT: alanine aminotransferase; Na: sodium; K: potassium. * After 1 year of treatment discontinuation, the patient should be
released from follow-up if cure criteria has been met. **Thorax X-ray: according to the presence of changes.
clinical form, severity, and antifungal treatment administered, as
itraconazole promotes a faster response than cotrimoxazole in
the acute form rather than the chronic form. In the second year of
follow-up, the consultations should become semi-annual. Once
the cure criteria have been met, treatment should be discontinued
and patients should be followed-up on an outpatient basis for up
to two years. After this period, if the patient continues to meet
cure criteria, the patient can be released from outpatient follow-
up and instructed to return if necessary.
According to the clinical presentation of PCM, specific follow-
up examinations, such as ultrasound (e.g. to evaluate the evolution
of nodal masses or nodular images in abdominal organs), and
CT, or MRI to evaluate cephalic lesions should be requested.
Clinical specialty outpatient support
Patients with PCM that involves the larynx (dysphonia)
and trachea should be referred to an otorhinolaryngologist
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

726
for evaluation and specialized examinations, such as
nasofibroscopy, for early diagnosis and treatment of
complications.
Despite adequate treatment and satisfactory therapeutic
response, patients who develop persistent dyspnea associated
with cutaneous and mucosal lesion scarring and body weight
recovery should be referred to a pulmonologist to treat
cicatricial lung disease or associated respiratory pathologies.
Similarly, patients with Addison’s syndrome caused by
adrenal impairment as a result of active or residual PCM
should be followed up by an endocrinologist, especially those
patients who were unresponsive to usual treatments. Patients
with PCM with neurological, intestinal, or abdominal lymphatic
involvement, accompanied by malabsorption syndromes,
reproductive organ lesions, or other clinical situations, should
be followed-up by a specialized physician because management
of disease in these patients often presents additional difficulties.
INDICATIONS FOR HOSPITALIZATION
The following types of patients must be hospitalized:
1.	 Patients with disseminated forms presenting one of
the following complications: neurological alterations,
respiratory insufficiency, nutritional status deficiency,
gastrointestinal
involvement,
jaundice,
ascites,
or
hemodynamic changes.
•	 Patients presenting comorbidities, such as AIDS,
tuberculosis, and/or neoplasia, and if there is a need
for better diagnostic investigation or observed clinical
deterioration.
•	 Patients with sequelae and clinical instability, such as
decompensated COPD, cor pulmonale, Addison’s disease,
laryngeal, or tracheal stenosis (Figure 10).
ASSESSMENT OF COMORBIDITIES AND
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
Many patients with chronic PCM are smokers and present
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) prior
to the diagnosis of mycosis. Other diseases are relatively
common in patients with PCM, particularly chronic infectious
parasitic diseases and neoplasias. Predisposing factors of PCM
are believed to promote the occurrence of certain diseases,
including tuberculosis, leishmaniasis, Chagas disease, leprosy,
and strongyloidiasis33. Further, Paracoccidioides spp. may be
opportunistic in patients with reduced cellular immunity as a
result of underlying disease or immunosuppressive treatments.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis has been reported in approximately 2% to
20% of PCM cases, and the disease can be diagnosed before,
after, or concurrently with PCM. When the two infections occur
simultaneously, difficulties may arise in the diagnosis, selection
of antifungal therapy, and recognition of therapeutic response68.
In patients with lung injuries related to Paracoccidioides spp.
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 10 - Sequelae of PCM in the respiratory system. A and B. Microstomia
resulting from perioral lesions. C. Tracheostomy as a result of tracheal
stenosis. D. Chest X-ray showing residual bilateral reticular infiltrate. E and
F. CT showing post-treatment septal thickening, peripheral reticulation, and
peribroncovascular thickening. PCM: paracoccidioidomycosis. Reproduction
with modification: Shikanai-Yasuda, MA, Telles Filho F de Q, Mendes
RP, Colombo AL, Moretti ML, Grupo de Consultores do Consenso em
Paracoccidioidomicose. Consenso Brasileiro em Paracoccidioidomicose. Rev
Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006;39(3):297-31039.
infection, sputum smear microscopy is recommended to
evaluate the occurrence of tuberculosis, especially when there
is pulmonary infiltrate affecting the upper lobes.
Cancer
Several studies have reported that between 0.16% and
14.1% of patients with PCM also present with a neoplasm at
some point in their lives19. Carcinomas were observed more
frequently in the lungs, oropharynx, and larynx. Patients with
Paracoccidioides spp.-related airway lesions may develop
carcinomas at or near the fungal lesion several years later19.
Whether PCM represents a risk factor for cancer or if both
diseases have similar predisposing factors remains controversial.
In patients with PCM, the frequency of cancer is higher
in smokers than in nonsmokers69. Diagnostic suspicion is
fundamental for early diagnosis and treatment because clinical
manifestations of cancer in patients with PCM can be masked
by symptoms resulting from sequelae of fungal lesions in the
lungs, larynx, or pharynx, especially in smokers and alcoholics.
Less frequently, PCM manifests simultaneously or reoccurs
with neoplasias, such as lymphoma, leukemia, and pulmonary
carcinoma19,70. This PCM is probably opportunistic and presents
with localized lesions, particularly in the lung or disseminated.
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

727
These patients are generally treated with antifungal therapy and
any deaths are attributed to neoplasia. In areas endemic to PCM,
this mycosis should be considered in cases of cancer patients
experiencing clinical worsening.
Organ transplantation and
immunosuppressive therapy
Opportunistic PCM has been observed in patients with reduced
cellular immunity as a result of renal or hepatic transplantation,
use of immunosuppressants, such as corticosteroids and cytotoxic
and immunobiological drugs for the treatment of several diseases,
or, in rare cases, primary immunodeficiency. This is exemplified
by a case report of rheumatoid arthritis and bone sarcoma in which
the patient was medicated with adalimumab, methotrexate, and
leflunomide, and presented with lung and bone disease related to
Paracoccidioides spp. infection20. In a small number of cases, PCM
manifested a few days to 14 years after kidney transplantation,
which enabled the evaluation of PCM’s clinical and laboratory
characteristics under these conditions. Chest X-rays revealed that
these patients had bilateral nodules18, pulmonary cavitation71,72,
or bronchopneumonic infiltrate73. Lymphatic impairment was
uncommon74. In these cases, microbiological diagnosis should
be preferential because serological tests generally show low
titers of anti-Paracoccidioides spp. antibodies73,75. As in other
immunosuppressed patients, unusual clinical and serological
expressions may confuse and delay the diagnosis of PCM. In
addition, the response to therapy in renal transplant patients may
be slow, especially with the administration of oral antifungal
agents72-74. In half of these cases, death was reported. The use of
effective and intravenous antifungal agents is thus recommended,
as well as rigorous monitoring of immunosuppressed patients who
have been exposed to areas endemic to PCM.
HIV infection and AIDS
Opportunistic PCM has been observed in HIV-infected
patients, with up to 1.5% of Brazilian AIDS cases reporting
simultaneously PCM infection17,76. In these co-infected patients,
PCM progresses more rapidly and lesions are more widespread,
involving lymphadenomegaly, umbilicated cutaneous lesions,
hepatosplenomegaly, pulmonary infiltrates, and lesions of the
central nervous system and other tissues. Most cases present
mixed clinical manifestations with lesions predominantly of
acute/subacute PCM, but with frequent pulmonary lesions,
which may be atypical43. Many patients have a low CD4 +
lymphocyte count and may present PCM as the first manifestation
of AIDS. Although about 30% of the cases do not present anti-
Paracoccidioides spp. antibodies, the fungus is easily recognized
or isolated in mycological or histopathological examinations.
HIV/Paracoccidioides spp. co-infection can lead to death, but
most patients can be cured with intensive antifungal treatment
combined with antiretrovirals and secondary prophylaxis17.
Recommendations for patients suspected of
comorbidities and immunosuppression
1.
Request an acid-fast bacilli smear and culture in three
samples of sputum from patients with pulmonary PCM,
particularly those patients who present with fever, night
sweats, and infiltrate and/or cavitation in the upper lobes
of the lungs.
2.
Perform an otorhinolaryngological follow-up in patients
with laryngeal lesions that persist with dysphonia to perform
a differential diagnosis with tuberculosis or neoplasia.
3.
In patients with pulmonary involvement and declining re-
spiratory function despite appropriate treatment, the fol-
lowing conditions should be considered: bacterial infec-
tion, smoking-related lung disease (COPD), or associated
neoplasia or sequelae with functional consequences.
4.
Investigate a possible HIV infection in patients with
suggestive epidemiology and in patients with acute/
subacute or mixed form PCM.
5.
In immunocompromised patients, the absence of
antibodies, even in disseminated disease, does not rule
out the diagnosis of PCM, which should be investigated
with microbiological testing, and, if possible, with tissue
biopsy and histopathological examination.
SEQUELAE
PCM is a systemic disease whose host response to the
infecting agent consists of chronic granulomatous inflammation
associated with an overlying fibrosing process. Thus, in addition
to granuloma formation, there is an increased production of
cytokines, including TNF-α and TGF-β, which can induce collagen
and reticulin accumulation in the infected tissue. This fibrosing
response may then lead to anatomical and functional changes
in the organs affected during infection, especially the lungs.
Pulmonary
Despite treatment, chronic PCM may continue to present
symptoms, such as varying degrees of cough, hyaline expectoration,
and dyspnea41,42. In addition, changes in spirometry, including an
obstructive pattern, may also be observed in most cases, which
is justified by the association of peribronchial fibrotic sequelae
with the history of smoking in most patients42. A complete lung
function test may also show air trapping and diffusion reduction,
which in more severe cases can lead to chronic hypoxemia42. Most
patients, even after completing treatment, show scarring alterations
upon imaging tests, especially CT scans44 (Figure 10), which can
reveal architectural distortion (90%), septal and reticulated
thickening (88%), centrolobular or parasseptal emphysema
(82%), bronchial thickening (82%), parenchymal bands (74%),
scarring in emphysema areas (66%), nodules <3 cm (62%), and
pulmonary cysts (10%)42. In gasometry, an increased alveolar-
arterial O2 gradient, hypoxemia, and hypercapnia may be present,
with the latter signaling greater severity. Pulmonary hypertension
is rare, and secondary to parenchymal changes.
Adrenal glands
On average, adrenal impairment is observed in 56% of
autopsied cases, ranging from 48.2% to 80.0%34,36. However,
15% to 50% of patients undergoing adrenal evaluation
present with a hampered reserve, despite the absence of
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

728
clinical manifestations, and 3.5% of these patients present
with Addison’s disease, which requires frequent hormonal
replacement therapy throughout one’s life49,50.
Larynx
Laryngeal sequelae are characterized by dysphonia, as
hoarseness and alterations in airflow and indicate poor closure
of the fibrotic vocal cords. These complications are associated
with an increased risk of pulmonary infections by aspiration and
even difficulty of socializing because the voice is so altered77.
Sequelae of the trachea can lead to obstruction of the airway
and subsequent respiratory insufficiencies that can require
tracheostomy or even surgical correction of tracheal stenosis.
Central nervous system
Patients frequently develop motor deficits, convulsive
syndromes (epilepsy), and/or hydrocephalus. Cerebellar
impairment occurs in about 20% to 30% of PCM cases with
neurological involvement, and these cases often rapidly evolve to
intracranial hypertension, which requires ventricular shunting51,52.
Neurological forms of PCM have substantial risks for sequelae.
Skin
Cutaneous sequelae can lead to esthetic and oral mucosa
alterations and even microstomia, which require special care for
patient feeding and surgical correction after antifungal treatment.
Main differential diagnoses
Sputum microbiology
Sputum cytology
Chest X-ray and tomography
Serum (antibody/antigen)
PCM –
relapse
+ or –Paracoccidoides
-
Recurrence of previous lesions,
radiological findings of
activity*
+ For PCM*
+ para PCM
Infectious diseases
Fungi
+ or -
-
Variable: Chronic
histoplasmosis, pulmonary
cryptococcosis, and chronic
cavitary aspergillosis
+ histoplasmosis,/Aspergillosis
antibodies,Antigenemia
+:criptococcosis
Bacteria
Gram +/-
+ or - Culture
-
Alveolar consolidation, air
bronchogram, sometimes
interstitial infiltrate
-
Tuberculosis
AFB +
+ culture
-
Centerlobular nodules,  distr.
segmentar or confluent
micronodules, budding tree
pattern, cavities: thick walls,
upper thirds; pleural effusion
-
Neoplasia
-
+ neoplastic cells
Variable, neoplastic cells, with
higher frequency of nodule or
solitary mass excavated or not;
localized atelectasis
-
PCM - sequela
-
-
Scarring emphysema,
bronchial thickening, signs
of interstitial fibrosis, and
peribroncovascular.
Low titers possible in PCM
sequelae
TABLE 4
Diagnostic approach to respiratory complaints in treated patients.
PCM: paracoccidioidomycosis;: AFB: acid-fast bacilli; +: positive ; -: negative ; ±: positive or negative. *Consolidation, frosted glass lesions, thick-walled cavities,
thickening of alveolar septa, nodules, and confluent masses.
Lymphatic
The sequelae of the abdominal lymphatic system can lead to
obstructive jaundice, as a result of lymph node involvement in
the hepatic hilum78 and malabsorption syndrome of proteins and
fats54,79. The social and economical cost of these complications
has not been adequately evaluated by the scientific community
or health authorities.
Evaluation and follow-up of pulmonary sequelae
Patients with PCM that involves the lungs may present with
persistent respiratory symptoms despite undergoing adequate
treatment. Thus, the presence of respiratory sequelae in the
lung that are associated with the pathologies or recurrence of
PCM should be actively investigated in symptomatic patients80.
Spirometry should be performed and, in the presence of
an obstructive disorder, the introduction of bronchodilator
medication is suggested, following guidelines for the treatment
of COPD81. Chest X-rays and CTs not only aid in the investigation
of associated pathologies, such as lung neoplasia, but also aid in
the diagnosis of disease recurrence (onset or recrudescence of
lesions with radiological signs of activity, such as nodules and
masses with cavities and ground glass density nodules). Co-
infections, especially tuberculosis (Table 2 and Table 4), should
be investigated through microbiological examinations of sputum
and, if necessary, bronchoalveolar lavage. Arterial blood gas
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

729
analysis may indicate the need for supplemental oxygen in cases
of severe hypoxemia (PaO2 <55mmHg), and should be requested
in patients with hypoxemia measured via pulse oximetry81. In
more advanced cases from a clinical, spirometric, or laboratory
point of view, a pulmonologist should perform an evaluation to
characterize the severity and orientation of the therapy.
TREATMENT
Unlike other pathogenic fungi, P. brasiliensis and P. lutzii
are susceptible to most systemic antifungal agents – even
sulfonamide derivatives can inhibit their growth. There is no
solid evidence to support primary or secondary resistance to
the drugs used in PCM treatment. Therefore, several antifungal
drugs have been shown to be effective in treating different
clinical forms of the disease, including azole derivatives
(ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole,
posaconazole, and isavuconazole82-87), sulfonamide derivatives
(cotrimoxazole, sulfadiazine, etc.)88, amphotericin B
(formulations in deoxycholate, lipid and liposomal complex)
for severe forms89-91, and even terbinafine92.
Despite the vast therapeutic arsenal available for disease
management, itraconazole, cotrimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole/
trimethoprim combination), and amphotericin B are more
commonly used in clinical practice. There is currently no in
vitro or in vivo evidence showing that PCM by P. brasiliensis
and P. lutzii respond differently to the antifungal agents used
in the treatment of the disease. Therefore, the therapeutic
recommendations are valid for all patients with PCM.
Although Latin America has high PCM incidence, morbidity,
and mortality rates, only two randomized clinical trials involving
patients with PCM have been published. However, neither
study had statistical power capable of identifying crucial
definitions, such as efficacy, safety, and treatment duration83,86.
Thus, the suggested guidelines for PCM treatment are based on
only two prospective, open randomized studies, and multiple
Drugs
Dose
Average duration
Itraconazole*
200mg daily
**Children < 30kg e > 5 years, 5 to 10mg/kg/day, adjust dose without
opening the capsule
9-18 months
Cotrimoxazole*
Trimethoprim, 160mg + Sulfamethoxazole, 800mg (VO 8/8h or 12/12h)
Children –Trimetoprim, 8 to 10mg/kg + Sulfamethoxazole, 40 to
50mg/kg, VO 12/12h
18-24 months***
Amphotericin B
Deoxycholate 0.5-0.7mg/kg/day (IV)
Lipid formulation 3-5mg/kg/day (IV)
2-4 weeks**** (until improvement)
TABLE 5
Most commonly used drugs in patients with paracoccidioidomycosis.
CNS: central nervous system. *Do not use concomitantly with astemizole, antacids and H2 blockers, barbiturates, cisapride, cyclosporine, didanosine, digoxin,
fentanyl, phenytoin, rifampicin, cisapride, and terfenadine. **Increased experience in children with sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim treatment. ***Extend the
duration of treatment when there is CNS involvement. ****Requires maintenance treatment with itraconazole or cotrimoxazole.
retrospective or prospective, comparative or non-comparative
studies82,86,90,93,94. Although tested in a small number of patients,
voriconazole, posaconazole, and isavuconazole have been shown
to have inhibitory action in vitro against Paracoccidioides spp.
isolates, and therefore, these agents are potentially useful in
the treatment of PCM. However, drug interactions and adverse
events of prolonged therapy should be taken into account.
Treatment of patients with mild
and moderate forms
Itraconazole at a dose of 200mg daily has been widely used
in the treatment of mild and moderate forms of PCM with high
rates of efficacy and safety. Therefore, at present, this triazole is
the treatment of choice for patients with mild to moderate forms
of PCM. The duration of treatment may vary from 9 to 18 months,
with an average duraction of 12 months, and the patient should
always be evaluated by clinical, immunological, and radiological
criteria. (Table 5). In general, the tegumentary lesions heal 30
days after the start of treatment and the lymphadenopathies regress
between 45 and 90 days. Stabilization of radiological images is
usually observed after 6 months of itraconazole use.
As with many triazole fungicides, the absorption of
itraconazole may be impaired by a number of factors, such
as drug interactions, achlorhydria, previous gastrectomy,
alkaline food intake, or fasted state (Table 5, Table 6,
Table 7, and Table 8). For increased serum levels in adult
patients, itraconazole capsules should be ingested in a single
intake after lunch or dinner. Acidic beverages, such as citrus
juices, can increase the absorption of itraconazole, while
alkaline foods decrease absorption. Fractionated dosing of
itraconazole is not recommended because its absorption from
the gastrointestinal tract occurs only when the drug is packed
in intact capsules. In terms of clinical efficacy (predominantly
with chronic PCM), treatment duration and adherence, and
pharmacoeconomics, several retrospective, comparative studies
have shown that the treatment of PCM with itraconazole is
more advantageous than treatment with sulfamethoxazole/
trimethoprim (cotrimoxazole)93,94.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

730
Drugs
Sulfamethoxazole + Trimethoprim (SXT)
Amphotericin B
Azathioprine
Risk of leukopenia by medullary suppression Monitor
No interactions found
Aminoglycosides
(amikacin, gentamicin, tobramycin,
netilmicin, and streptomycin)
No interactions found
↑ nephrotoxicity
Combination contraindicated
Cyclosporine
↓ cyclosporine
↑ risk of nephrotoxicity
Avoid combination
↑ nephrotoxicity
↑ ototoxicity
Combination contraindicated
Digoxin
↑ digoxin
Use with caution
↑ risk of toxicity of digoxin if ↓K
Monitor carefully
Phenytoin
↑ Phenytoin
Use with caution and monitor
No interactions found
Isoniazid
No interactions found
No interactions found
Loperamide
No interactions found
No interactions found
Methotrexate
↑ toxicity methotrexate
Avoid combination
No interactions found
Metformin
↑Metformin
Minor interaction
No interactions found
Rifampicin
↓SXT – Monitor
No interactions found
Pyrimethamine
↑ risk of megaloblastic anemia Monitor
Warfarin
↑ Warfarin effect
Avoid combination
No interactions found
Thiazides
↑ risk of thrombocytopenic purpura Monitor
No interactions found
TABLE 6
Drug interactions of sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim and amphotericin B.
K: potassium; SXT: sulfametoxazole-thrimethoprim; References: http://reference.medscape.com/drug-interactioncheck95; https://online.epocrates.com/interaction-
check96.
New azole derivatives
Although only a small number of patients have been treated
with other drugs on the expanded triazole spectrum triazoles,
including voriconazole, posaconazole (with expected future
use with extended release capsules), and isavuconazol, these
drugs can be considered as potential substitutes for itraconazole
as their costs become more affordable and new evidence is
published86,87; however, drug interactions should be taken into
account95,96 (Table 6, Table 7 and Table 8).
Cotrimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim)
Although cotrimoxazole is fungistatic and requires a longer
treatment duration than that of itraconazole, cotrimoxazole is the
second treatment option for patients with mild to moderate forms
of PCM. Cotrimoxazole’s advantages include large availability
within Brazil’s public health system, tablet form, oral and
venous formulations, and good absorption with predictable
serum levels. The oral suspension can be used in children
who do not tolerate tablets and in adults who do not swallow
tablets because of stenotic laryngeal or esophagus lesions. The
cotrimoxazole venous solution can be used in patients with
digestive disorders and/or who do not absorb oral medication
well. Cotrimoxazole can also be used in contraindications
of itraconazole, or in cases of suspected therapeutic failure
or concomitant tuberculosis treatment. According to a few
published cases, cotrimoxazole is the treatment of choice for
patients with neuroparacoccidioidomycosis52,97.
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

731
Drugs
Fluconazole
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Voriconazole
Posaconazole
Amitriptyline
↑ QT *Avoid
combination
↑ QT* Avoid
combination
↑ QT*Avoid
combination
↑ QT*Avoid
combination
↑ QT*Avoid
combination
Warfarin
↑ Warfarin
Avoid
combination
↑ Warfarin
Avoid combination
↑ Warfarin
Avoid combination
↑ Warfarin
Avoid combination
↑ Warfarin
Avoid combination
Calcium channel
blockers
↑blocker effect
Combination not
contraindicated
↑ blocker effect
Combination not
contraindicated
↑ blocker effect
Combination not
contraindicated
↑ blocker effect
Combination not
contraindicated
↑ blocker effect
Combination not
contraindicated
H2 blockers, antacids,
sucralfate
No interactions found
↓ Itraconazole
Avoid combination
↓ Ketoconazole
Avoid combination
No interactions found
↓ Posaconazole
Avoid combination
Carbamazepine
↑Carbamazepine
Monitor serum
carbamazepine level
Use with caution
↑Carbamazepine
↓Itraconazole
Monitor serum
carbamazepine level
Use with caution
↑Carbamazepine
↓Ketoconazole
Monitor serum
carbamazepine level
Use with caution
↑Carbamazepine
↓Voriconazole
Combination
contraindicated
↑Carbamazepine
↓Posaconazole
Monitor serum
carbamazepine level
Use with caution
Cyclosporine
↑Cyclosporine
Use with caution
↑Posaconazole
↑Cyclosporine
Monitor clinical
treatment
↑Cyclosporine Monitor
serum level
↑Cyclosporine
Monitor serum level
↑Posaconazole
↑Cyclosporine
Monitor clinical
treatment
Phenytoin
↑Phenytoin
Use with caution
↓Itraconazole
Avoid
combination
↑Phenytoin
↓Ketoconazole
Avoid combination
↑Phenytoin
↓Voriconazole
Avoid combination
or monitor
↑Phenytoin
↓Posaconazole
Avoid combination
Isoniazid
No interactions found
↓Itraconazol e Monitor
serum level
↓Ketoconazole
Combination
contraindicated
↑Voriconazole
Monitor serum level
No interactions
found
Proton pump
inhibitors
(omeprazole)
↑effect of proton
pump inhibitors
Use with caution
↓Itraconazole
Avoid combination
↓Ketoconazole
Combination
contraindicated
↑ effect of proton
pump inhibitors
Use with caution
↓Posaconazole
Avoid
combination
Lovastatin /
Simvastatin
↑ Lovastatin /
Simvastatin
Combination
contraindicated
↑ Lovastatin /
Simvastatin
Combination
contraindicated
Risk of myopathy
and rhabdomyolysis
↑ Lovastatin /
Simvastatin
Combination
contraindicated
Risk of myopathy and
rhabdomyolysis
↑ Lovastatin /
Simvastatin
Combination
contraindicated
Risk of myopathy
and rhabdomyolysis
↑ Lovastatin /
Simvastatin
Combination
contraindicated
Risk of
myopathy and
rhabdomyolysis
Midazolam/
triazolam
oral
↑ Midazolam
Risk of respiratory
depression Avoid
combination
↑ Midazolam
Risk of respiratory
depression
Combination
contraindicated
↑ Midazolam
Risk of respiratory
depression
Combination
contraindicated
↑ Midazolam
Risk of respiratory
depression
Avoid combination
↑ Midazolam
Risk of respiratory
depression
Avoid
combination
Rifampicin/
rifabutin
↓Fluconazole
↓Rifampicin
Consider increasing
the dose of
fluconazole
↓Itraconazole
↓Rifampicin Monitor
treatment efficacy
↓Ketoconazole
↓Rifampicin
Monitor treatment
efficacy
↓Voriconazole
↓Rifampicin
Combination
contraindicated
↓Posaconazole
↓Rifampicin
Monitor treatment
efficacy
Sirolimus
↑Sirolimus
Combination
contraindicated
↑Sirolimus
Use with caution
↑Sirolimus
Combination
contraindicated
↑Sirolimus
Combination
contraindicated
↑Sirolimus
Combination
contraindicated
Tacrolimus
↑ QT
↑ Tacrolimus
Avoid combination
↑ Tacrolimus
Avoid combination
↑ Tacrolimus
Avoid combination
↑ Tacrolimus
Use with caution
↑ Tacrolimus
Use with caution
TABLE 7
Main drug interactions for azole antifungals.
References: http://reference.medscape.com/drug-interactioncheck95; https://online.epocrates.com/interaction-check95;*QT interval in electrocardiogram.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

732
Antiretroviral
Fluconazole
Itraconazole
Voriconazole
Posaconazole
Zidovudine
↓Zidovudine
Minor interaction
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
Tenofovir
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
Lamivudine
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
Efavirenz
(avoid combination with
azoles)
Minor interaction
↑Efavirenz
↓Itraconazole
↑Efavirenz
↓Voriconazole
↑Efavirenz
↓Posaconazole
Dolutegravir
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
Darunavir
↑Darunavir
↑Darunavir
Avoid combination
↑Darunavir
↑Darunavir
Ritonavir
↑Ritonavir
Use with caution
↑Ritonavir; ↑Itraconazol
Avoid combination
↑Ritonavir; ↓Voriconazole
Combination contraindicated
↑Ritonavir; ↑Posaconazole
Lopinavir/
ritonavir
↑Lopinavir
↑Ritonavir
Avoid combination
↑Lopinavir
↑Ritonavir
↑Itraconazol
Avoid combination
↑Ritonavir
↓Voriconazole
Combination contraindicated
↑Lopinavir
↑Ritonavir
↓Posaconazole
Use with caution
Atazanavir
↑Atazanavir
Minor interaction
↑Atazanavir
↑Itraconazol
Use with caution
↑Atazanavir
Combination contraindicated
↑Atazanavir
Minor interaction
Abacavir
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
No interactions found
TABLE 8
Drug interaction between antiretrovirals and azole antifungals.
References: http://reference.medscape.com/drug-interactioncheck95; https://online.epocrates.com/interaction-check96.
Treatment of patients with severe and
disseminated forms
For severe and disseminated forms of PCM, amphotericin
B in deoxycholate or in lipid formulation (liposomal or lipid
complex) is indicated for use. The recommended induction dose
of conventional amphotericin B is 0.5-0.7mg/kg/day, with a
maximum of 50mg/day. Lipid formulations should be prescribed
at doses of 3 to 5mg/kg/day. The duration of treatment depends
on the clinical stability of the patient and amphotericin B should
be administered for the shortest possible time (on average 2 to
4 weeks). Transition to oral medication during the consolidation
phase should occur after clinical stabilization once the drug’s
oral absorption has been confirmed.
If the lipid formulations of amphotericin B cannot be used,
intravenous cotrimoxazole formulation is recommended at
a dose of 800mg/160mg every 8 hours. Despite having little
clinical experience, intravenous fluconazole (600 to 800mg/
day) can also be a therapeutic option.
The main therapeutic challenges of PCM management are
the continuous use of systemic antifungal agents for extended
periods, the possibility of relapse, and the appearance of
sequelae, mainly in the respiratory tract. In addition to the use of
antifungal drugs, PCM therapeutic management should include
measures that improve the patient’s general condition, treatment
of infectious or non-infectious comorbidities, application of cure
criteria, and post-therapeutic follow-up.
Corticosteroids
Although scarce, there is evidence in the literature that some
patients with PCM may benefit from the use of corticosteroids
concomitantly with antifungal treatment98. Patients that have
been shown to benefit from this approach often have intense
inflammation, either in the ganglia or central nervous system,
serious lesions of the larynx or trachea, and lung lesions resulting
in respiratory insufficiency. The use of prednisone for 1 to 2
weeks can reduce inflammation during therapy with antifungal
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

733
agents. In patients with PCM and AIDS who are administered
antifungal and antiretroviral drugs but still present with worsening
clinical symptoms, the possibility of immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) may be taken into account, based
on other infections associated with  HIV/AIDS.
General measures
All patients should be treated long enough to reduce
signs and symptoms, stabilize body weight, have clear chest
X-rays, and appropriate serum antibody titers. In addition to
specific antifungal therapy, patients with severe forms of PCM
need general measures to improve their nutritional status and
immunosuppression. Regulating smoking, alcohol consumption,
adrenal insufficiency, and other associated conditions also
contribute to a better patient outcome. Therefore, the following
factors are important in achieving PCM cured criteria: rest, a
hyperproteic and hypercaloric diet supplemented with vitamins,
alcohol and tobacco restriction, and treatment of Addison’s
disease and associated infections, such as enteroparasitoses
and respiratory bacterial co-infections. However, these
recommended measures are useless if the patient cannot access
antifungal medication, which the majority of the individuals
with PCM cannot do because of their socioeconomic status
and inability to afford treatment. Therefore, in the future,
outpatient medications (itraconazole and cotrimoxazole) should
be provided free of charge.
Therapy in special populations
Pregnancy
PCM can occur in pregnant women either as an initial
manifestation or as a reactivation of a previously controlled
fungal disease. PCM is believed to occur in pregnant women
because of the reduction of immune responses in pregnancy,
which also predisposes these women to other systemic mycoses.
In one study, Paracoccidioides spp. disseminated to the
placenta, but there were no reports of fetal involvement99. PCM
in pregnant women is controllable with the usual antifungal
agents, primarily amphotericin B (category B). However, with
the possibility of a teratogenic effect, the use of azole drugs
(category C) and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (category
D) should be avoided100. Amphotericin B (category B) and
sulfadiazine (category C) are alternatives for use during all
gestational periods, but sulfadiazine should be discontinued
15 days before the expected delivery date to avoid neonatal
complications. Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim may be
used during breastfeeding100. Antifungal therapy should be
maintained throughout all gestational periods to prevent relapse
and postpartum discontinuation should be assessed by the usual
cure criteria. After birth, conventional antifungal therapy should
be administered until the patient reaches the cure criteria.
AIDS
Patients with AIDS generally have severe and widespread
forms of PCM; therefore, these patients should be initially
treated with amphotericin B or, if appropriate, with high doses
of itraconazole, 600mg/day (with attention towards interactions
with antiretroviral drugs) or intravenous sulfamethoxazole/
trimethoprim (2 ampoules every 8 hours). Despite having limited
clinical experience, intravenous fluconazole (600-800mg/day)
may be a therapeutic option. To avoid possible drug interactions,
PCM should be treated initially with antifungals for 3 to 5
weeks prior to initiation of antiretroviral therapy. Following the
cure of PCM, secondary prophylaxis with sulfamethoxazole
(1,600mg/day), trimethoprim (320mg/day), or itraconazole
(200mg/day) is recommended based on the treatment of other
mycoses in immunocompromised patients. Prophylaxis should
continue until the administered antiretroviral therapy elevates the
CD4 lymphocyte count to a minimum of 100 cells/μL (concomitantly
with undetectable viral load) to 200 cells/μL, regardless of viral load
for at least 3 months. The use of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim
(800/160mg every 12 hours) is also effective as a primary and
secondary prophylaxis for pneumocystosis and as primary
prophylaxis for neurotoxoplasmosis. In immunosuppressed
patients, the absence of antibodies, even in disseminated disease,
does not rule out the diagnosis of PCM, which should be
investigated with microbiological tests and, if possible, with tissue
biopsy and histopathological examination.
Hepatic or renal insufficiency
The doses of the drugs used in PCM treatment should be
adjusted in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
Renal insufficiency101-103
Amphotericin B
This drug should be avoided because of its high potential
for nephrotoxicity, which is compounded with the use of
consecutive series. Serum amphotericin B levels are not
significantly affected by hemodialysis and do not require
adjustment in these cases. One should opt for other drugs or a
lipid formulation of amphotericin B.
Azoles
Since several azoles present renal excretion, their dose
should be adjusted as follows101-103.
Fluconazole: this azole has 80% renal clearance, and when
renal clearance is less than 50ml/min, the dose should be reduced
to 50% and administered at intervals of 48 hours. If renal
clearance is less than 20 ml/min, the dose should be reduced
to one-third of the normal dose and administered at intervals
of 72 hours. In the case of hemodialysis, the full dose should
be used after the dialysis process and 50% of the normal dose
should be used during peritoneal dialysis.
Itraconazole: when renal clearance is less than 10ml/min,
the dose should be reduced to 50%. In the case of hemodialysis
or peritoneal dialysis, 100mg of an oral solution should be
administered every 12 to 24 hours.
Voriconazole: when creatinine clearance is more than 50ml/
min, use a 6mg/kg loading dose every 12 hours twice, followed
by a 4mg/kg/day every 12 hours. Do not use an IV solution when
clearance is less than 50ml/min. In cases of renal replacement
therapy, hemodialysis, or peritoneal dialysis use 4mg/kg/day
every 12 hours.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

734
Terbinafine: when clearance is greater than 50ml/min,
administer a dose only every 24 hours, and avoid use when
clearance is less than 50ml/min.
Sulphamidic derivatives
Sulphamidic derivatives present renal excretion and their
metabolites may cause toxicity because they are poorly soluble
at an acidic pH (urine), resulting in the formation of crystals that
are deposited in the renal tubules that can lead to obstruction
and subsequent kidney damage. Cases of interstitial nephritis
have also been reported. These derivatives can be removed by
dialysis. As a result, these products should be avoided in patients
with renal insufficiency.
Functional liver changes101-104
PCM can cause functional liver changes via hepatocytic
injury or extrinsic cholestatic compression104. In these cases,
PCM treatment follows the proposed standards and the
patient typically exhibits satisfactory responses. However,
hepatotoxicity induced by antifungal agents may occur.
Amphotericin B
This drug has been known to accumulate in organs, often
remaining in the liver, but rarely leading to an increase in
transaminases. Amphotericin B deoxycholate is slightly
hepatotoxic, unlike its lipid derivatives, which have the
disadvantage of displaying a higher hepatic toxicity. Liver
failure does not cause significant retention of the drug, which
maintains a stable serum level.
Azoles
The biochemical changes observed with itraconazole persist
with continued treatment. In treatment with cotrimoxazole and
itraconazole, the commonly reported biochemical changes do
not exceed 5x the upper limit of normality, which allows the
maintenance of the treatment. However, there are case reports
in which itraconazole had to be discontinued. Of the azoles,
fluconazole is the least hepatotoxic.
Metabolized in the liver with contraindications
relating to serious liver diseases
Ketoconazole, voriconazole and Sulphonamides
Voriconazole and ketoconazole are the most hepatotoxic
agents, followed by itraconazole105. Therefore, these agents
should be avoided in cases of severe hepatic impairment.
Fluconazole can be used with great caution if the patient cannot
be treated with amphotericin.
Metabolized in the liver with adjusted doses
relating to liver diseases
Voriconazole should be administered at 6mg/kg every 12 hours
for two doses, followed by a dose of 2mg/kg/day every 12 hours.
Sulphamidic derivatives
These agents rarely cause severe hepatotoxic injury, and may
be used. Despite treatment maintenance, liver toxicity induced
by cotrimoxazole evolves with the normalization of serum
liver enzymes. In patients with hepatic impairment caused by
other conditions, such as cirrhosis or alcoholic liver disease,
amphotericin B deoxycholate should be used because it is less
toxic to the liver than other preparations. An alternative agent
is fluconazole.
Paracoccidioidomycosis in children39,40,106,107
In children infected with PCM, the most commonly used
treatment is the combination of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim
because it has known efficacy, good tolerability, syrup-like
presentation for dose administration and adequacy, and is
provided by the public health network39,40,106. The recommended
dose ranges between 8 to 10mg/kg/day of trimethoprim in two
daily doses, and no fasting is required. Intravenous formulation
is an alternative when the oral route is contraindicated, as in
cases of intestinal subocclusion. The intravenous formulation
should be administered at the same dosage twice a day. Among
the side effects reported, leukopenia is frequent; however,
this condition can be controlled without other associated
complications with the concomitant use of folinic acid106.
Itraconazole may be used as a second option at a dose of 5
to 10mg/kg/day once daily. Amphotericin B deoxycholate, as
well as other formulations of amphotericin B, is reserved for
severe cases108. During treatment, some patients may present
with a paradoxical reaction characterized by clinical worsening,
such as new lymph node enlargements, fistulization, fever, and
weight loss. In this case, steroids should be administered108.
Paracoccidioidomycosis in situations
of limited resources
In Rondônia, a systematic registry of PCM cases has been
maintained since 1997, with periods of more than 15 cases per
100,000 inhabitants occurring over the years. In the stratified
analysis by municipality, periods of almost 40 cases per 100,000
inhabitants were documented in the southern region of the
state14.
Individuals with PCM who are rural workers with low levels
of education, precarious socioeconomic statuses, and difficulty
assessing health care services are susceptible to delayed
diagnoses, which may contribute to the disease’s aggravation
with evolution to sequelae. In Rondônia, about one-third of
the patients with PCM had a diagnosis based on clinical-
epidemiological criteria14, as serological examination was not
an available method during this period. In the last 4 years, data
on more than 100 PCM cases treated at the Tropical Medicine
Center of Rondônia showed a predominance of the chronic form
with frequent mucosal involvement. Further, treatment usually
began approximately 7 months after infection and persisted until
a therapeutic response from both cotrimoxazole and itraconazole
was observed. The expansion of the diagnostic network; the
standardization and availability of antigens of the different
species described to perform serological tests; the training of
health professionals, often from other states and still not aware
of the regional importance of PCM; and the availability of easy-
to-administer medicines by the public authorities, can contribute
to a better approach to the disease.
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

735
Criteria for cure
After the diagnosis of PCM has been confirmed, treatment
involves long-term regimens with periodic follow-up, usually on
an outpatient basis. The duration of therapy should be evaluated
according to the cure criteria based on clinical, mycological,
radiological, and immunological parameters.
Clinical criteria
Cure clinical criteria for PCM include the absence or regression
of disease signs and symptoms of the disease, such as the healing of
tegumentary lesions, involution of adenomegaly, and stabilization
of body weight. The patient’s oral lesions subjectively improve
after 2 weeks of initial treatment, and after 1 month, there is lesion
scarring. In addition, skin lesions also regress after 1 month and
lymphadenomegaly occurs between 2 and 3 months. It is common
to observe the persistence of residual symptoms or sequelae
as a result of lesion scarring and fibrosis. The most commonly
observed sequelae occur in the lungs, lymphatic system, adrenals,
and CNS. Signs and symptoms resulting from sequelae should
be differentiated from the clinical presentation of active disease.
Mycological criteria
Negative direct mycological examination in clinical
specimens occurs early if treatment is effective. This parameter
is more easily verified when examining respiratory secretions.
In other materials, such as biopsies or lymph node secretions,
fungal assessment is unnecessary because the lesions regress
or disappear with treatment.
Radiological criteria
Pulmonary opacities, initially of nodular, micronodular, or
reticular pattern, and cavitary lesions tend to become linear
images, indicating pulmonary lesion scarring and fibrosis. The
stabilization of pulmonary radiological image patterns should
be analyzed in semiannual chest X-rays (Table 3).
Immunological criteria
The most commonly used serological method for detecting
antibodies is the DID reaction. An antibody titer is expected
to be negative or stabilized at low levels with treatment
(undiluted serum or 1:2 dilution). Alternatively, when using
counterimmunoelectrophoresis (CIE), stabilization occurs in
undiluted serum until a 1:4 dilution. Serological evaluations
should be conducted every 6 months, when available.
Post-treatment follow-up
The term definitive cure can never be applied to patients
with PCM because P. brasiliensis cannot be eradicated
from the organism. Therefore, the aim PCM treatment is to
reduce the fungal load in the patient’s body, allowing cellular
immunity and the balance between parasite and host to recover.
After treatment and the observation of cure criteria, patients
should undergo outpatient follow-up with routine clinical and
serological evaluation. Clinical relapse can be indicated by a
positive titer or increase in the DID titer value. Periodic clinical
examination with weight control and verification of oral lesion or
lymphadenopathy occurrence should be performed for a period
of up to 1 year after achieving the cure criteria.
CONTROL, PREVENTION,
CHALLENGES, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Control and prevention
Currently, a vaccine to prevent Paracoccidioides spp. infection
in humans is not available, although promising results have been
observed in laboratory animals109. Recommendations for the
prevention of PCM derive from knowledge of the most obvious
infection situations, which occur as a result of aerial exposure to
conidia in endemic areas and predisposing risk factors.
In both rural and periurban environments, inhabitants should
avoid exposure to dust from soil excavation, earthworks, and
plant manipulation. For rural workers and tractor drivers who
are constantly exposed to the dense dust, such as those who
perform hand-picking, cleaning (sweeping), and coffee sweeping,
exposure should be avoided by using well-sealed cabin machines
or N95 respirators (not always available). In practice, the
replacement of manual coffee sweeping with an oven may have
contributed to an observed decrease in PCM incidence among the
former coffee regions. Further, children and immunosuppressed
individuals are advised to avoid to situations of risk in rural
areas. In laboratories, the manipulation of fungal isolates should
be performed in a safety hood, especially if the cultures are
in the mycelium form. For laboratories that routinely handle
Paracoccidioides spp., pre-exposure and annual serological
examination of researchers is recommended to monitor possible
fungal infection. Accidents in a research laboratory involving
transdermal inoculation of Paracoccidioides spp. should be
managed by monitoring the presence of antifungal antibodies
in the affected person at the time of suspected infection, after
3 months, and after 6 months. Prophylaxis with itraconazole
should be administered orally at 200mg/day for 30 days.
Since chronic PCM has been shown to be associated
with both smoking and average alcohol consumption16,
smoking and excessive alcohol consumption (and subsequent
malnutrition) should be avoided before and after exposure.
Patients immunosuppressed by drugs and/or transplants20,110
have an increased risk of developing PCM. Since a case
report has described the transmission of supra-renal PCM
through kidney donation111, prior evaluation of organs from
donors suspected of having epidemiological antecedents is
recommended. Respective donor recipients suspected of having
epidemiological antecedents should also be evaluated before
and during immunosuppression via a chest radiograph and
Paracoccidioides spp. antibody test.
Challenges
In addition to improving the prevalence and incidence
rates of PCM, there are a number of new challenges in the
management of the disease, such as the registration of cases
by compulsory notification and notification through drug
access in outpatient and inpatient cases, standardization of
serological methods, critical evaluation of antifungal therapies
and corticosteroid use, search for new therapeutic approaches
for sequelae, the P. brasiliensis complex, and the description
of a new species of Paracoccidioides, P. lutzii.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

736
For the clinician, it is important to evaluate the current
epidemiological, clinical, diagnostic, and therapeutic impact
of the different species on the human disease. For instance,
the north and midwest regions have been associated with PCM
infections caused by P. lutzii because of molecular identification
of isolates in these areas1,5,9 and higher sera reactivity of patients
with proven disease in these areas to P. lutzii antigen63,64.
Although clinical data and therapeutic response are similar
for both species (data from Mato Grosso do Sul), little is
known about the isolation and molecular identification of the
species in patients8 because mycological and histopathological
examinations cannot distinguish these species and molecular
tests are not available in routine laboratories66.
The following issues remain unanswered: knowledge of the
epidemiological-molecular profile of Paracoccidioides isolates
in Brazil to enhance the clinical-epidemiological diagnosis;
characterization of the antigenic profile of the isolates and their
correlation with clinical-laboratory data of disease caused by
both species1,7, including sequelae and response to different
drugs, as well as analysis of drug susceptibility112,113.
Of great importance to public health is the introduction of
simple methods, such as mycological examination, that can serve
as the first choice in diagnosis in poor regions. These methods
would be especially useful in cases where tuberculosis diagnosis
is excluded. However, this requires the joint effort of public
agencies and the academic community to develop a serological
diagnosis that is universally available for both P. lutzii and P.
brasiliensis infections, with stable antigenic fractions and easily
reproducible tests. The international academic community has
united the endemic Latin American countries to create the
Latin American Network of Paracoccidioidomycosis through
the Working Group on Paracoccidioidomycosis114 to overcome
these challenges. The dissemination of knowledge collected
from clinical-epidemiological, mycological, and serological
data in all endemic regions is also a fundamental step for the
early diagnosis, treatment, and establishment of comprehensive
patient care.
Recommendations
The following are general recommendations for improving
the care of patients with PCM:
1.	 Institute a compulsory notification of cases with probable
and proven PCM;
2.	 Create a national registry of cases through notification via
access to medicine or hospitalization;
3.	 Enable universal access to itraconazole and cotrimoxazole
for treatment of mild to moderate forms;
4.	 Enable access to lipid formulations of amphotericin in
special situations, such as immunosuppression, and to
amphotericin B deoxycholate, which has been released
for marketing after receiving approval of minimum
pharmacological requirements;
5.	 Structure a basic care network based on clinical-
epidemiological, mycological (direct and cultural), and
serological diagnosis;
6.	 Facilitate access to histopathological diagnosis in the
absence of mycological diagnosis;
7.	 Provide stable and reproducible antigens of P. brasiliensis
and P. lutzii in the public health network;
8.	 Standardize a serological technique for diagnosis and
follow-up at the national level;
9.	 Stimulate the evaluation of the role of corticosteroids in
the treatment of patients with intense and/or extensive
inflammatory lesions;
10.	 Enhance the evaluation of antifungal maintenance therapy
in immunosuppressed patients according to the degree of
immunodepression;
11.	 Determine the appropriate moment to introduce antiretroviral
therapy to AIDS patients, considering the presence of drug
interactions and possibility of IRIS, and establishing the
parameters for such evaluations;
12.	 Create a data bank on the distribution of the different
species of Paracoccidoides in the country to be used in
epidemiological diagnoses and to launch multicentric
projects with serological tests and typing of isolates with
the support of consolidated groups and network projects.
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTION
General coordination of the consensus: Shikanai-Yasuda MA.
Final critical review: Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Martinez R, Moretti
ML, Colombo A, Queiroz-Telles F, and Mendes RP. Thematic
coordination, design, writing, critical review, and final approval
of the version to be published: Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Martinez
R, Moretti ML, Colombo A, Queiroz-Telles F, and Mendes RP.
Experts who participated in the composition of the
Brazilian Guidelines for the Clinical Management of
Paracoccidioidomycosis, 2017 - writing and responsibility for
the document in terms of accuracy and integrity: Shikanai-
Yasuda MA, Martinez R, Moretti ML, Colombo A, Queiroz-
Telles F, Mendes RP, Kono ASG, Paniago AM, Nathan A, Valle
ACF, Bagagli E, Benard G, Ferreira MS, Teixeira MM, Silva-
Vergara ML, Pereira RM, Cavalcante RS, Hahn RC, Durlacher,
RR, Khoury Z, and Camargo ZP.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the Brazilian Society of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene for supporting this consensus and the translation of  this
manuscript, the Brazilian Society of Infectology and Sociedade
Paulista de Infectologia for supporting this consensus and
the Departamento de Moléstias Infecciosas e Parasitárias da
FMUSP, for partial support to the coordinators´ meeting. We
thank the Departamento de Saúde Comunitária, Universidade
Federal do Paraná, PR, BR, Disciplina de Infectologia da
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Departamento de Cardio-
Pneumologia da FMUSP, Prof. Silvio de Alencar Marques,
Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu, UNESP and Prof. Dr.
Carlos P. Taborda, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas da USP
for the photographs. We thank the Editorial Board of the
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

737
Revista da Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical and
the authors and consultants of the “Consenso Brasileiro em
Paracoccidioidomicose”, 2006, for authorizing the reproduction
and modification of the Figures/Tables, the Editorial Board of
the Journal of Fungi, for authorizing the reproduction of Figure
3, the Editorial Board of mEsphere, of Figure 1 (modified) and
the Editorial Board of Seminary Respiratory Critical Care
Medicine, of Table 2 (modified); Alex Adriano da Silva and Vera
Lúcia T. Freitas for the technical support in the preparation of
the Figures.3 and 1A, respectively.
DECLARATION OF POTENTIAL
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
This statement was taken to consider only the drugs
mentioned in this consensus and whose patents have not been
lost in the last five years:
Arnaldo Lopes Colombo, Continuing Medical Education:
Gilead, MSD, Pfizer, United Medical and Research Grants from
Astellas and Pfizer; Flávio Queiroz Telles, Continuing Medical
Education: Gilead, MSD, Pfizer, TEVA, United Medical; Maria
Aparecida Shikanai Yasuda, Continuing Medical Education:
United Medical.
Other co-authors declare no conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1.	 Teixeira MM, Theodoro RC, Oliveira FF, Machado GC, Hahn RC,
Bagagli E, et al. Paracoccidioides lutzii sp. nov.: biological and
clinical implications. Med Mycol. 2014;52(1):19-28.
2.	 Matute DR, McEwen JG, Puccia R, Montes BA, San-Blas G,
Bagagli E, et al. Cryptic speciation and recombination in the fungus
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis as revealed by gene genealogies.
Mol Biol Evol. 2006;23(1):65-73.
3.	 Muñoz JF, Farrer RA, Desjardins CA, Gallo JE, Sykes S,
Sakthikumar S, et al. Genome diversity, recombination, and
virulence across the major lineages of Paracoccidioides. mSphere.
2016;1(5):e00213-16.
4.	 de Macedo PM, Almeida-Paes R, de Medeiros Muniz M, Oliveira
MM, Zancope-Oliveira RM, Costa RL, et al. Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis PS2: first autochthonous paracoccidioidomycosis
case report in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and literature review.
Mycopathologia. 2016;181(9-10):701-8.
5.	 Marques-da-Silva SH, Rodrigues AM, de Hoog GS, Silveira-
Gomes F, Camargo ZP. Occurrence of Paracoccidioides lutzii in
the Amazon region: description of two cases. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2012;87(4):710-4.
6.	 Teixeira MM, Theodoro RC, Nino-Vega G, Bagagli E, Felipe MS.
Paracoccidioides species complex: ecology, phylogeny, sexual
reproduction, and virulence. PLoS Pathog. 2014;10(10):e1004397.
7.	 Theodoro RC, Teixeira MM, Felipe MSS, Paduan KS, Ribolla PM,
San-Blas G, et al. Genus Paracoccidioides: species recognition and
biogeographic aspects. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37694.
8.	 Hahn RC, Rodrigues AM, Fontes CJF, Nery AF, Tadano T, Queiroz-
Júnior LP, et al. Fatal fungemia due to Paracoccidioides lutzii. Am J
Trop Med Hyg. 2014;91(2):394-8.
9.	 Queiroz-Júnior LP, Camargo ZP, Tadano T, Rodrigues AM,
Takarara DT, Gegembauer G, et al. Serological and antigenic
profiles of clinical isolates of Paracoccidioides spp. from Central
Western Brazil. Mycoses. 2014;57(8):466-72.
10.	 Wanke B, Londero AT. Epidemiology and paracoccidioidomycosis
infection. In: Franco MF, Lacaz CS, Restrepo-Moreno A, Del Negro
G, editors. Paracoccidioidomycosis. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1994.
p. 109-20.
11.	 Lacaz CS, Porto E, Martins JEC, Heins-Vaccari EM, Melo NT.
Paracoccidioidomicose. In: Lacaz CS, Porto E, Martins JEC,
Heins-Vaccari EM, Melo NT, editors. Tratado de Micologia Médica
Lacaz. São Paulo: Sarvier Editora de Livros Médicos Ltda; 2002.
p. 639-729.
12.	 Restrepo-Moreno A. Ecology of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis.
In: Franco MF, Lacaz CS, Restrepo-Moreno A, Del Negro G (ed)
Paracoccidioidomycosis. 1st ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1994.
p. 121-30.
13.	 Arantes TD, Theodoro RC, Teixeira MM, Bosco SM, Bagagli E.
Environmental mapping of Paracoccidioides spp. in Brazil reveals
new clues into genetic diversity, biogeography and wild host
association. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10(4):e0004606.
14.	 Vieira GD, Alves TC, Lima SMD, Camargo LMA, Sousa CM.
Paracoccidioidomycosis in a western Brazilian Amazon State:
Clinical-epidemiologic profile and spatial distribution of the
disease. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2014;47(1):63-8.
15.	 Barrozo LV, Benard G, Silva ME, Bagagli E, Marques SA,
Mendes RP. First description of a cluster of acute/subacute
paracoccidioidomycosis cases and its association with a climatic
anomaly. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2010;4(3):e643.
16.	 dos Santos WA, da Silva BM, Passos ED, Zandonade E, Falqueto
A. Associação entre tabagismo e paracoccidioidomicose: um estudo
de caso-controle no Estado do Espírito Santo, Brasil. Cad Saúde
Pública. 2003;19(1):245-53.
17.	 Morejón KM, Machado AA, Martinez R. Paracoccidioidomycosis
in patients infected with and not infected with human
immunodeficiency vírus: a case control study. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2009;80(1):359-66.
18.	 Radisic MV, Linares L, Afeltra J, Pujato N, Vitale RG, Bravo M,
et al. Acute pulmonary involvement by paracoccidioidomycosis
disease immediately after kidney transplantation: case report and
literature review. Transpl Infect Dis. 2017; 19(2):e12655.
19.	 Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Conceição YM, Kono A, Rivitti E,
Campos AF, Campos SV. Neoplasia and paracoccidioidomycosis.
Mycopathologia. 2008;165(4-5):303-12.
20.	 Woyciechowsky TG, Dalcin DC, dos Santos JW, Michel GT.
Paracoccidioidomycosis induced by immunosuppressive drugs in a
patient with rheumatoid arthritis and bone sarcoma: case report and
review of literature. Mycopathologia. 2011;172(1):77-81.
21.	 Martinez R. New tends in paracoccidioidomycosis epidemiology.
J. Fungi. 2017;3(1):1.
22.	 Coutinho ZF, Silva D, Lazéra M, Petri V, Oliveira RM, Sabroza
PC, et al. Paracoccidioidomycosis mortality in Brazil (1980-1995).
Cad Saúde Pública. 2002;18(5):1441-54.
23.	 Coutinho ZF, Wanke B, Travassos C, Oliveira RM, Xavier DR,
Coimbra Jr CE. Hospital morbidity due to paracoccidioidomycosis
in Brazil (1998-2006). Trop Med Int Health. 2015;20(5):673-80.
24.	 Benard G. An overview of the immunopathology of human
paracoccidioidomycosis. Mycopathologia. 2008;165(4-5):209-21.
25.	 Benard G, Romano CC, Cacere CR, Juvenale M, Mendes-
Giannini MJ, Duarte AJ. Imbalance of IL-2, IFN-gamma and
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

738
IL-10 secretion in the immunosuppression associated with human
paracoccidioidomycosis. Cytokine. 2001;13(4):248-52.
26.	 Oliveira SJ, Mamoni RL, Musatti CC, Papaiordanou PM, Blotta
MH. Cytokines and lymphocyte proliferation in juvenile and adult
forms of paracoccidioidomycosis: comparison with infected and
non-infected controls. Microbes Infect. 2002;4(2):139-44.
27.	 de Castro LF, Ferreira MC, da Silva RM, Blotta MH, Longhi LN,
Mamoni RL. Characterization of the immune response in human
paracoccidioidomycosis. J Infect. 2013;67(5):470-85.
28.	 Cavassani KA, Campanelli AP, Moreira AP, Vancim JO, Vitali
LH, Mamede RC, et al. Systemic and local characterization
of regulatory T cells in a chronic fungal infection in humans.
J Immunol. 2006;177(9):5811-8.
29.	 Ferreira MC, de Oliveira RT, da Silva RM, Blotta MH, Mamoni
RL. Involvement of regulatory T cells in the immunosuppression
characteristic of patients with paracoccidioidomycosis. Infect
Immun. 2010;78(10):4392-401.
30.	 Carvalho FMC, Busser FD, Freitas VLT, Furucho CR, Sadahiro A,
Kono ASG, et al. Polymorphisms on IFNG, IL12B and IL12RB1
genes and paracoccidioidomycosis in the Brazilian population.
Infect Genet Evol. 2016;43:245-51.
31.	 Romano CC, Mendes-Giannini MJ, Duarte AJ, Benard G. IL-12
and neutralization of endogenous IL-10 revert the in vitro antigen-
specific cellular immunosuppression of paracoccidioidomycosis
patients. Cytokine. 2002;18(3):149-57.
32.	 Romano CC, Mendes-Giannini MJS, Duarte AJ, Benard G. The
role of interleukin-10 in the differential expression of interleukin-
12p70 and its beta2 receptor on patients with active or treated
paracoccidioidomycosis and healthy infected subjects. Clin
Immunol. 2005;114(1):86-94.
33.	 Bellissimo-Rodrigues F, Bollela VR, Da Fonseca BA, Martinez R.
Endemic paracoccidioidomycosis: relationship between clinical
presentation and patients' demographic features. Med Mycol.
2013;51(3):313-8.
34.	 Franco M, Mendes RP, Moscardi-Bacchi M, Rezkallah-Iwasso M,
Montenegro MR. Paracoccidioidomycosis. Baillière’s Clin Trop
Med Communic Dis. 1989;4:185-220.
35.	 Franco M, Montenegro MR, Mendes RP, Marques SA, Dillon
NL, Mota NGS. Paracoccidioidomycosis: a recently proposed
classification of its clinical forms. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop.
1987;20(2):129-32.
36.	 Montenegro MR, Franco M. Pathology. In: Franco M, Lacaz CS,
Restrepo-Moreno A, Del Negro G, editors. Paracoccidioidomycosis.
Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1994. p. 131-50.
37.	 Fabris LR, Andrade UV, Dos Santos AF, Marques APC, de Oliveira
SMVL, Mendes RP, et al. Decreasing prevalence of the acute/
subacute clinical form of paracoccidioidomycosis in Mato Grosso
do Sul State, Brazil. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2014;56(2):121-5.
38.	 Barbosa W, Daher R, Oliveira AR. Forma linfático-abdominal
da blastomicose sul-americana. Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo.
1968;10(1):16-27.
39.	 Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Telles Filho FQ, Mendes RP, Colombo
AL, Moretti ML e Grupo de Consultores do Consenso em
Paracoccidioidomicose. Consenso em paracoccidioidomicose.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2006;39(3):297-310.
40.	 Ferreira MS. Paracoccidioidomycosis. Pediatr Respir Rev.
2009;10(4):161-5.
41.	 Mendes RP. The gamut of clinical manifestations. In: Franco
M, Lacaz CS, Restrepo-Moreno A, Del Negro G, editors.
Paracoccidioidomycosis. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1994. p. 233-58.
42.	 Costa AN, Benard G, Albuquerque ALP, Fujita CL, Magri ASK,
Salge JM, et al. The lung in paracoccidioidomycosis: new insights
into old problems. Clinics. 2013;68(4):441-8.
43.	 Benard G, Duarte AJ. Paracoccidioidomycosis: a model for
evaluation of the effects of human immunodeficiency vírus infection
on the natural history of endemic tropical diseases. Clin Infect Dis.
2000;31(4):1032-9.
44.	Tobón AM, Agudelo CA, Osorio ML, Alvarez DL, Arango M,
Cano LE, et al. Residual pulmonary abnormalities in adult patients
with chronic paracoccidioidomycosis: prolonged follow-up after
itraconazole therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(7):898-904.
45.	 Machado Filho J, Miranda JL, Teixeira GA. Das seqüelas da
blastomicose sul-americana. Hospital. 1965; 68(6):1347-53.
46.	 Valle ACF, Aprigliano FF, Moreira JS, Wanke B. Clinical
and endoscopic findings in the mucosae of the upper
respiratory and digestive tracts in post-treatment follow-up of
paracoccidioidomycosis patients. Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo.
1995;37(5):407-13.
47.	 Marques SA. Paracoccidioidomycosis: epidemiological, clinical,
diagnostic
and
treatment
up-dating.
An
Bras
Dermatol.
2013;88(5):700-11.
48.	 Wanke
B,
Valle
ACF,
Oliveira
RMZ,
Costa
RLB.
Paracoccidioidomicose. In: Coura, JR, org. Dinâmica das doenças
infecciosas e parasitárias. 2nd ed. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Guanabara
Koogan, Grupo Editorial Nacional-GEN; 2013. v. 2. p. 1225-37.
49.	 Del Negro G, Melo EHL, Rodbard D, Melo MR, Layton
J,
Wachslicht-Rodbard
H.
Limited
adrenal
reserve
in
paracoccidiodomycosis: cortisol and aldosterone responses to 1-24
ACTH. Clin Endocrinol.1980;13(6):553-9.
50.	 Colombo AL, Faiçal S, Kater CE. Systematic evaluation of the
adrenocortical function in patients with paracoccidioidomycosis.
Mycopathol. 1994;127(2):89-93.
51.	 Pereira WC, Raphael A, Sallum J. Lesões neurológicas da
blastomicose sul-americana. Arq Neuro-Psiquiatr. 1965;23(2):
95-112.
52.	 Almeida SM, Queiroz-Telles F, Teive HA, Ribeiro CE, Werneck LC.
Central nervous system paracoccidioidomycosis: clinical features
and laboratory findings. J. Infect. 2004;48(2):193-8.
53.	 Martinez R, Meneguelli UG, Dantas RO, Fiorillo AM. O
comprometimento gastrintestinal na blastomicose Sul-Americana
(paracoccidiodomicose).
I
Estudo
clínico,
radiológico
e
histopatológico. Rev Ass Méd Brasil. 1979;25(1):31-44.
54.	 Laudanna AA, Betarello A,van Bellen B. South American
blastomycosis as a cause of malabsorption and protein-losing
enteropathy. Arq Gastroenterol. 1975;12:195-8.
55.	 Queiroz-Telles F, Escuissato D. Pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis.
Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;32(6):764-74.
56.	 Arantes TD, Theodoro RC, Teixeira MM, Bagagli E. Use of
fluorescent oligonucleotide probes for differentiation between
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis and Paracoccidioides lutzii in yeast
and mycelial phase. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2017;112(2):140-5.
57.	 Nobrega de Almeida Jr J, Del Negro GM, Grenfell RC, Vidal MS,
Thomaz DY, de Figueiredo DS, et al. Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry for differentiation of
the dimorphic fungal species Paracoccidioides brasiliensis and
Paracoccidioides lutzii. J Clin Microbiol. 2015;53(4):1383-6.
58.	 Del Negro GM, Pereira CN, Andrade HF, Palacios SA, Vidal
MMS, Charbel CE, et al. Evaluation of tests for antibody response
in the follow-up of patients with acute and chronic forms of
paracoccidioidomycosis. J Med Microbiol. 2000;49(1):37-46.
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines

739
59.	 Do Valle AC, Costa RL, Fialho Monteiro PC, Von Helder J, Muniz
MM, Zancopé-Oliveira RM. Interpretation and clinical correlation
of serological tests in paracoccidioidomycosis. Med Mycol.
2001;39(4):373-7.
60.	 Moreto TC, Marques MEA, de Oliveira MLSC, Moris DV, de
Carvalho LR, Mendes RP. Accuracy of routine diagnostic tests used
in paracoccidioidomycosis patients at a university hospital. Trans R
Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2011;105(8):473-8.
61.	 Camargo ZP, Berzaghi R, Amaral CC, Silva SHM. Simplified
method for producing Paracoccidioides brasiliensis exoantigens
for use in immunodiffusion tests. Med Mycol. 2003;41(6):539-42.
62.	 Mendes-Giannini MJS, Bueno JP, Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Stoff
AMS, Masuda A, Amato Neto V, et al. Antibody response to the
43 kDa glycoprotein of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis as a marker
for the evaluation of patients under treatment. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
1990;43(2):200-6.
63.	 Batista Jr J, de Camargo ZP, Fernandes GF, Vicentini AP, Fontes
CJF, Hahn RC. Is the geographical origin of a Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis isolate important for antigen production for regional
diagnosis of paracoccidioidomycosis? Mycoses. 2010;53(2):176-80.
64.	 Gegembauer G, Araujo LM, Pereira EF, Rodrigues AM, Paniago
AMM, Hahn RC, et al. Serology of paracoccidioidomycosis due to
Paracoccidioides lutzii. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014;8(7):e2986.
65.	 Marques da Silva SH, Colombo AL, Blotta MHSL, Lopes JD,
Queiroz-Telles F, Pires de Camargo Z. Detection of circulating gp43
antigen in serum, cerebrospinal fluid and bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid of patients with paracoccidioidomycosis. J Clin Microbiol.
2003;41(8):3675-80.
66.	 Gaviria M, Rivera V, Muñoz-Cadavid C, Cano LE, Naranjo
TW. Validation and clinical application of a nested PCR for
paracoccidioidomycosis diagnosis in clinical samples from
Colombian patients. Braz J Infect Dis. 2015;19(4):376-83.
67.	 Vidal MS, Del Negro GM, Vicentini AP, Svidzinski TI, Mendes-
Giannini MJ, Almeida AM, et al. Serological diagnosis of
paracoccidioidomycosis: high rate of inter-laboratorial variability
among medical mycology reference centers. PLoS Negl Trop Dis.
2014;8(9):e3174.
68.	 Quagliato Júnior R, Grangeia TAG, Massucio RAC, De
Capitani EM, Rezende SM, Balthazar AB. Association between
paracoccidioidomycosis and tuberculosis: reality and misdiagnosis.
J Bras Pneumol. 2007;33(3):295-300.
69.	 Rodrigues GS, Severo CB, Oliveira FM, Moreira JS, Prolla JC,
Severo LC. Association between paracoccidioimycois and cancer.
J Bras Pneumol. 2010;36(3):356-62.
70.	 Ruiz e Rezende LS, Yasuda AG, Mendes RP, Marques AS, Niéro-
Melo L, Defaveri J, et al. Paracoccidioidomycosis in patientes with
lymphoma and review of published literature. Mycopathologia.
2015;179(3-4):285-91.
71.	 Zavascki AP, Bienardt JC, Severo LC. Paracoccidioidomycosis in
organ transplant recipient: case report. Rev Inst Trop Sao Paulo.
2004;46(5):279-81.
72.	 Goes HFO, Durães SMB, Lima CS, Souza MB, Vilar EAG, Dalston
MO. Case Report. Paracoccidioidomycosis in a renal transplant
recipient. Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 2016;58:12.
73.	 Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Duarte MI, Nunes DF, Lacaz CS, Sabbaga
E, Abdala E, et al. Paracoccidioidomycosis in a renal transplant
recipient. J Med Vet Mycol. 1995;33(6):411-4.
74.	 Pontes AM, Borborema J, Correia CR, de Almeida WL, Maciel
RF. A rare paracoccidioidomycosis diagnosis in a kidney transplant
receptor: case report. Transpl Proc. 2015;47(4):1048-50.
75.	 Radisic MV, Linares L, Afeltra J, Pujato N, Vitale RG, Bravo M,
et al. Acute pulmonary involvement by paracoccidioidomycosis
disease immediately after kidney transplantation: case report and
literature review. Transpl Infect Dis. 2017;19(2):e-12655.
76.	 Almeida FA, Neves FF, Mora DJ, Reis TA, Sotini DM, Ribeiro BM,
et al. Paracoccidioidomycosis in Brazilian patients with and without
human immunodeficiency vírus infection. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2016;96(2):368-72.
77.	 Weber SAT, Brasolotto A, Rodrigues L, Marcondes-Machado J,
Padovani CR, Carvalho LR, et al. Dysphonia and laryngeal sequelae
in paracoccidioidomycosis patients: a morphological and phoniatric
study. Med Mycol. 2006;44(3):219-25.
78.	 Boccalandro I, Albuquerque FJM. Icterícia e comprometimento
hepático na blastomicose sul-americana. A propósito de 10 casos.
Revisão da literatura. Rev Paul Med. 1960;56:350-66.
79.	 Troncon LEA, Martinez R, Meneghelli UG, Oliveira RB, Iazigi N.
Perda intestinal de proteínas na paracoccidioidomicose. Rev Hosp
Clín Fac Med São Paulo. 1981;36(4):172-8.
80.	 Costa AN, Marchiori E, Benard G, Araújo MS, Baldi BG, Kairalla
RA, et al. Lung cysts in chronic paracoccidioidomycosis. J Bras
Pneumol. 2013;39(3):368-72.
81.	 Vogelmeier CF, Criner GJ, Martinez FJ, Anzueto A, Barnes PJ,
Bourbeau J, et al. Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management,
and Prevention of Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 2017
Report. GOLD Executive Summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2017;195(5):557-82.
82.	 Restrepo A, Stevens DA, Gómez I, Leiderman E, Angel R,
Fuentes J, et al. Ketoconazole: a new drug for the treatment of
paracoccidioidomycosis. Rev Infect Dis. 1980;2(4):633-42.
83.	 Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Benard G, Higaki Y, Del Negro GM,
Hoo S, Vaccari EH, et al. Randomized trial with itraconazole,
ketoconazole and sulfadiazine in paracoccidioidomycosis. Med
Mycol. 2002;40(4):411-7.
84.	 Diaz M, Negroni R, Montero-Gei F, Castro LG, Sampaio AS, Borelli
D, et al. A Pan-American 5-year study of fluconazole therapy for
deep mycoses in the immunocompetent host. Pan-American Study
Group. Clin Infect Dis. 1992;14(suppl 1):S68-76.
85.	 Naranjo MS, Trujillo M, Munera MI, Restrepo P, Gomez I, Restrepo
A. Treatment of paracoccidioidomycosis with itraconazole. J Med
Vet Mycol. 1990;28(1):67-76.
86.	 Queiroz-Telles F, Goldani LZ, Schlamm HT, Goodrich JM, Espinel-
Ingroff A. Shikanai-Yassuda MA. An open-label comparative pilot
study of oral voriconazole and itraconazole for long-term treatment
of paracoccidioidomycosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;45(11):1462-9.
87.	 Thompson 3rd GR, Rendon A, Ribeiro Dos Santos R, Queiroz-
Telles F, Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Azie N, et al. Isavuconazole
treatment of cryptococcosis and dimorphic mycoses. Clin Infect
Dis. 2016;63(3):356-62.
88.	 Barbosa W, Vasconcelos WMP. Ação da sulfametoxazol associada
a trimetoprim na terapêutica da blastomicose sul-americana.
Rev Pat Trop. 1973;2:329-39.
89.	 Lacaz CS, Sampaio SAP. Tratamento da blastomicose sul-
americana com anfotericina B. Resultados preliminares. Rev Paul
Med 1958;52:443-50.
90.	 Campos EP, Sartori JC, Hetch ML, De Franco MF. Clinical and
serologic features of 47 patients with paracoccidioidomycosis treated
by amphotericin B. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 1984;26(4):212-5.
91.	 Peçanha PM, de Souza S, Falqueto A, Grão-Veloso TR, Lírio
LV, Ferreira Jr CUG, et al. Amphotericin B lipid complex in the
treatment of severe paracoccidioidomycosis: a case series. Int J
Antmicrobiol Agents. 2016;48(4):428-30.
Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 50(5):715-740, September-October, 2017

740
92.	Ollague JM, de Zuritta AM, Calero G. Paracoccidioidomycosis
(South American blastomycosis) successfully treated with
terbinafine: first case report. Br J Dermatol. 2000;143(1):188-91.
93.	 Borges SR, Silva GM, Chambela MC, Oliveira RV, Costa
RL,
Wanke
B,
et
al.
Itraconazole
vs.
trimethoprim–
sulfamethoxazole: a comparative cohort study of 200 patients with
paracoccidioidomycosis. Med Mycol. 2014;52(3):303-10.
94.	 Cavalcante RS, Sylvestre TF, Levorato AD, de Carvalho LR,
Mendes RP. Comparison between Itraconazole and cotrimoxazole
in the treatment of paracoccidiodomycosis. Plos Negl Trop Dis.
2014;8(4):e2793.
95.	 Medscape English. Drugs & Diseases. Drug Interaction Checker.
Available in April 5, 2017 from: http://reference.medscape.com/
drug-interactionchecker.
96.	 Epocrates.Athenahealth Inc USA. Interaction check. Available in
April 5, 2017 from:: https://online.epocrates.com/interaction-check.
97.	 Francesconi F, da Silva MTT, Costa RLB, Francesconi
VA, Carregal E, Talhari S, et al. Long-term outcome of
neuroparacoccidioidomycosis treatment. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop.
2011;44(1):22-5.
98.	 Benard G, Campos AF, Netto LC, Gonçalves LG, Machado
LR, Mimicos EV, et al. Treatment of severe forms of
paracoccidioidomycosis: is there a role for corticosteroids? Med
Mycol. 2012;50(6):641-8.
99.	 Blotta MHSL, Altemani AM, Amaral E, Silva LJ, Camargo ZP.
Placental involvement in paracoccidioidomycosis. J Med Vet Mycol.
1993;31(3):249-57.
100.	Kulay Jr L, Lapa AJ. Drogas na gravidez: manual de orientação. São
Paulo: Ponto; 2003. 180p.
101.	Levin ASS, Dias MBGS, Oliveira, MS, Lobo RD, Garcia CP e
Grupo de colaboradores. Guia de utilização de anti-infecciosos e
recomendações para a prevenção de infecções hospitalares. 5ª ed.
São Paulo: Hospital das Clínicas; 2014. 192p.
102.	Tavares W. Antibióticos e quimioterápicos para o clínico. 3ª ed.
São Paulo: Editora Atheneu, 2014. p. 658. ISBN-13 9788538805205
103.	Barraviera B, Pereira PCM, Mendes RP, Machado JM, Lima CRG,
Meira DA. Evaluation of acetylator phenotype, renal function and
serum sulfadiazine levels in patients with paracoccidioidomycosis
treated with cotrimazine (a combination of sulfadiazine and
trimethoprim). Mycopathologia. 1989;108(2):107-12.
104.	Braga GM, Hessel G, Pereira RM, Escanhoela CAF. Hepatic
involvement in pediatric patients with paracoccidioidomycosis: a
histological study. Histopathology. 2014;64(2):256-62.
105.	Talwalkar JA, Soetikno RE, Carr-Locke DL, Berg CL. Severe
cholestasis related to itraconazole for the treatment of onychomycosis.
Am J Gastroenterol. 1999;94(12):3632-3.
106.	Pereira RM, Bucaretchi F, Barison EM, Hessel G, Tresoldi AT.
Paracoccidioidomycosis in children: clinical presentation, follow-up
and outcome. Rev Inst Med Trop São Paulo. 2004;46(3):127-31.
107.	Shikanai-Yasuda
MA.
Pharmacological
management
of
paracoccidioidomycosis. Exp Opin Pharmacother. 2005;6(3):385-
97.
108.	Gryschek RCB, Pereira RM, Kono A, Patzina RA, Tresoldi AT,
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. Paradoxical reaction to treatment in
2 patients with severe acute paracoccidioidomycosis: a previously
unreported complication and its management with corticosteroids.
Clin Infect Dis. 2010;50(10):e56-8.
109.	Taborda
CP,
Urán
ME,
Nosanchuk
JD,
Travassos
LR.
Paracoccidioidomycosis: challenges in the development of a vaccine
against an endemic mycosis in the Americas. Rev Inst Med Trop São
Paulo. 2015;57(suppl 19):21-4.
110.	Severo LC, Londero AT, Geyer GR, Porto NS. Acute pulmonary
paracoccidioidomycosis
in
an
immunosuppressed
patient.
Mycopathologia. 1979;68(3):171-4.
111.	Batista MV, Sato PK, Pierrotti LC, de Paula FJ, Ferreira GF,
Ribeiro-David DS, et al. Recipient of kidney from donor with
asymptomatic infection by Paracoccidioides brasiliensis. Med
Mycol. 2012;50(2):187-92.
112.	Hahn RC, Morato Conceicão YT, Santos NL, Ferreira JF, Hamdan
JS. Disseminated paracoccidioidomycosis: correlation between
clinical and in vitro resistance to ketoconazole and trimethoprim
sulphamethoxazole. Mycoses. 2003;46(8):342-7.
113.	Zambuzzi-Carvalho PF, Fernandes AG, Valadares MC, Tavares
PM, Nosanchuk JD, Soares CM, et al. Transcriptional profile of the
human pathogenic fungus Paracoccidioides lutzii in response to
sulfamethoxazole. Med Mycol. 2015;53(5):477-92.
114.	Shikanai Yasuda MA, Felipe MS, Bagagli E, Puccia R.
Working Group on Paracoccidioidomycosis [internet] updated
2017. Available from: http://www.isham.org/WorkingGroups/
Paracoccidioidomycosis/
Shikanai-Yasuda MA, et al. - Paracoccidioidomycosis Brazilian Guidelines
Erratum
Revista da Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical/Journal of the Brazilian Society of Tropical Medicine
Ahead of Print, 2017 - doi: 10.1590/0037-8682-0230-2017
Ana Maria Paniago
Should read:
Anamaria M. M Paniago
[6]. Departamento de Clínica Médica, Centro de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, MT, Brasil.
Should read:
[6]. Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul, Campo Grande, MS, Brasil.
