=== COPD National Action Plan ===
Fonte: NHLBI/NIH (US gov)
URL: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/sites/default/files/media/docs/COPD%20National%20Action%20Plan%20508_0.pdf
Licenca: public-domain
Doenca: dpoc | Idioma: en
----------------------------------------------------------------------

C O P D
NATIONAL
ACTION PLAN

May 22, 2017
Dear Stakeholder:
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a leading cause of death in the United States, yet many
Americans are not aware of the significance of COPD as a major national health concern.
Now, with this COPD National Action Plan — a blueprint for a multi-faceted, unified fight against the disease — we
believe this can change. This forward-looking Plan has the potential to help transform our approach to COPD and
save lives. We at the National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, along with
the many other federal agencies striving to fight COPD, are proud of the highly collaborative effort that went into
crafting the Plan.
Charged with developing a national plan to address this devastating disease, we convened a Town Hall Meeting in
early 2016 that brought together more than 200 members of the COPD community­ — patients, caregivers, health
care providers, nonprofit organizations, and more. The attendees developed strategic objectives, goals, and tactics
that form the backbone of the Plan. Individuals, partners, and organizations across the country weighed in, offering
thoughtful comments and innovative ideas, which were carefully reviewed and used to create and refine the Plan.
The resulting document identifies a host of creative ways to educate the public about COPD and greatly improve
the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of the disease. It highlights the many opportunities that can help us
advance COPD research while turning policy and program recommendations into real action. Importantly, the Plan
strongly encourages the COPD community to coordinate efforts so that the critical goals — increasing awareness of
COPD and minimizing its burden — are fully achieved.
For years, our agencies have made combatting COPD a critical concern. We have supported new research to
increase our understanding of the disease, executed a national education program to spread awareness of it, and
culled important data that shows who is being affected and why. The COPD National Action Plan will help further
this work in a more powerful and synergistic way, and will serve as a thoughtful guide to all of us committed to
preventing COPD and improving the longevity and quality of life for those living with the disease.
To implement the COPD National Action Plan successfully, we need insight, input, and ongoing collaborations.
Together, we can make a positive and lasting impact, and the COPD National Action Plan is a major step toward
realizing that vision.
Francis S. Collins, M.D., Ph.D.
Director
National Institutes of Health
Anne Schuchat, M.D. (RADM, USPHS)
Acting Director
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

C O P D National Action Plan

COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

ii

CONTENTS
Why a National Action Plan — And Why Now?
1
What to Know About COPD
4
Goal 1: Empower people with COPD, their families,
and caregivers to recognize and reduce the burden of COPD.
7
Goal 2: Improve the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and management of COPD
by improving the quality of care delivered across the health care continuum.
11
Goal 3: Collect, analyze, report, and disseminate COPD-related
public health data that drive change and track progress.
17
Goal 4: Increase and sustain research to better understand the prevention,
pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and management of COPD.
23
Goal 5: Translate national policy, educational, and program
recommendations into research and public health care actions.
29
Organizations
35
Glossary
47
References
57
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

iii

iv
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

WHY A NATIONAL ACTION
PLAN — AND WHY NOW?
For the 16 million Americans diagnosed with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),2 and the millions of
others who do not know they have it,3 living a normal life
can be a daily struggle. The disease not only debilitates; it
kills. COPD is a leading cause of death in the United States,
following heart disease, cancer, and unintentional injuries.1
Since 1969, the death rate for COPD has doubled, even
as the number of deaths for other chronic conditions has
declined.4 COPD is also the fourth main cause of disability
in the United States,5 and it imposes an enormous burden
on the nation’s health care system. More than $32 billion
was spent on COPD-related patient care in 2010, and those
costs are projected to increase to $49 billion by 2020.6
Addressing the issues around COPD has been difficult.
Most COPD cases are preventable, as 8 in 10 COPD deaths
are caused by smoking.7
LEADING CAUSES OF
DEATH IN THE U.S.:1
HEART
DISEASE
CANCER
UNINTENTIONAL
INJURIES
COPD

1
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

Implementing proven strategies to prevent tobacco
use (e.g., smoke-free policies, tobacco price increases,
and aggressive media campaigns) while increasing
smoking-cessation services can reduce smoking
and smoking-related COPD. Some states and local
communities have developed action plans to improve
awareness and treatment of the disease. However,
significant differences in the prevalence of the disease
— from 12 percent in West Virginia to 3.8 percent in
Utah8 — have complicated these and other broader
efforts. The bottom line: Despite the work of many and
the progress made by some, millions continue to suffer
COPD’s devastating toll.
A coordinated national approach is now needed
to deal with the critical issues around this chronic
disease. Along with the steady efforts of researchers
seeking a cure and clinicians adopting new tools and
therapies for patients, the COPD National Action Plan
has the potential to change the trajectory of COPD.
Developed over the course of a year with input from
the COPD community at large, the Plan provides a
comprehensive, unified framework for action by those
affected by the disease and those who care about
reducing its burden.
16 MILLION PEOPLE HAVE BEEN DIAGNOSED WITH COPD
AND MILLIONS OF OTHERS DO NOT REALIZE THEY MAY HAVE IT.2,3
AGE-ADJUSTED PREVALENCE OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE (COPD) AMONG
ADULTS AGED ≥18 YEARS — BEHAVIORAL RISK FACTOR SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM, UNITED STATES, 20158
For a breakdown of state-by-state data, please see page 58.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

2

MAKING IT HAPPEN
Concerned about the growing incidence of COPD,
Members of the Congressional COPD Caucus urged
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to craft a
comprehensive federal plan to tackle the disease.9 In
response, the NIH’s National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute (NHLBI) collaborated with the CDC and
other federal partners to organize several interagency
workshops that laid the groundwork for a plan. During
the workshops, participants discussed and developed
several core goals the Action Plan would address.
Those initial goals served as the foundation for the
national COPD Town Hall Meeting that the NHLBI
hosted in early 2016.
During that two-day COPD Town Hall Meeting, federal
and nonfederal partners, including patients and their
families, participated in breakout groups that informed
the development of draft objectives, strategies, and
benchmarks for the goals. The comments shared during
those breakout groups directly informed the Action
Plan as it stands today. Indeed, the engagement of the
community remained integral to the Action Plan as its
five goals were further refined. Each goal addresses a
different aspect of the problems posed by COPD and
identifies the various entities in the community that
have the capability to deal with those specific issues.
In addition to engaging federal and nonfederal partners
and members of the community directly affected by
COPD, the NHLBI also invited feedback from the public
at large. The latter happened in the fall of 2016, when
the NHLBI made a first draft of the COPD National
Action Plan available for public comment. The NHLBI
and other federal partners carefully considered all the
comments and used them to finalize the Action Plan,
with the understanding that it is a “living” document —
subject to revisions as new needs and opportunities to
minimize the burden of COPD arise.
GEARING UP
With the completion of this critical first step, the
real work can now begin. The community of COPD
stakeholders is highly diverse, and its representatives
are equipped with different resources because of
where they work and the organizations and people
they serve. Yet, all can contribute to the successful
implementation of the COPD National Action Plan.
From patients and health care providers to federal
partners and advocacy groups, everyone can and
must play a role in supporting and moving the COPD
National Action Plan forward.
THE FIVE GOALS OF THE
NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
1
Empower people with COPD, their
families, and caregivers to recognize
and reduce the burden of COPD.
2
Improve the prevention, diagnosis,
treatment, and management of COPD
by improving the quality of care delivered
across the health care continuum.
3
Collect, analyze, report, and disseminate
COPD-related public health data that
drive change and track progress.
4
Increase and sustain research to
better understand the prevention,
pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment,
and management of COPD.
5
Translate national policy, educational,
and program recommendations into
research and public health care actions.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

3

WHAT TO
KNOW ABOUT
COPD
1.	 How does COPD affect the lungs?
In healthy lungs, the air we breathe goes down
bronchial tubes, or airways, that end in tiny air sacs.
As these air sacs fill up, they first stretch, then bounce
back to their original shape, much like the way a
rubber band or balloon might. This elasticity is critical,
as it helps move the air in and out of the lungs quickly.
In people with COPD, less air flows in and out of the
airways because of one or more of the following:
The airways and air sacs lose
their elastic quality.
The walls between many of the
air sacs are destroyed.
The airway walls become thick, and
airways are narrowed by inflammation.
The airways make more mucus than usual,
which can also clog them.
2.	 What are the symptoms of COPD?
In some cases, COPD may cause only mild symptoms
or no symptoms at all. As a result, people often
discount changes in their physical well-being or
may adjust their lifestyles to require less breathing
(e.g., resting while walking up steps). As the disease
progresses, symptoms usually become more severe.
Common signs and symptoms include:
CONSTANT COUGHING,
sometimes called a “smoker’s cough”
SHORTNESS OF BREATH
while doing everyday activities
INABILITY TO BREATHE EASILY
or take a deep breath
EXCESS MUCUS PRODUCTION
coughed up as sputum
WHEEZING
WHO HAS COPD?
BY ETHNICITY8
11%
AMERICAN
INDIANS/ALASKA
NATIVES
10%
MULTIRACIAL
6%
NON-
HISPANIC
BLACKS
6%
WHITES
3%
HISPANICS
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

4

3.	 What are the risk factors associated
with COPD?
COPD most often occurs in people with a history of
smoking. Approximately 80 percent of COPD deaths
are caused by smoking.7 However, about one-quarter
of those affected have never smoked.2 Exposure
to lung irritants — such as air pollution, dust, and
chemical or other fumes — in the workplace and
exposure to secondhand smoke or air pollutants
may contribute to COPD. Genetics can also play a
role in the development of COPD; people with a rare
condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency
are at an increased risk for COPD. Some 20 percent of
COPD patients report a history of asthma, which may
also be a contributing factor.10
The strong association with tobacco use makes COPD
highly preventable through interventions that focus
on discouraging youth and young adults from starting
to smoke, encouraging adults to quit, and providing
smoking-cessation support to current smokers.
Other efforts include programs and policies aimed
at reducing exposure to dust and chemicals in the
workplace, as well as exposure to indoor and outdoor
air pollutants.
4.	 How is COPD diagnosed
and treated?
A COPD diagnosis is based on signs and symptoms,
personal and medical history, and test results.
Lung function tests measure how much air can be
breathed in and out, how fast air is breathed out, and
how well lungs deliver oxygen to the blood. The main
lung function test for COPD is spirometry, but other
tests, such as a lung diffusion capacity test, also can be
used. Spirometry can detect COPD before symptoms
become severe. It is simple and noninvasive — the
patient breathes in deeply, then blows as hard as
possible into a tube connected to a small machine.
The instrument then measures how much air is blown
out, and how fast. Other tests to detect and diagnose
COPD may include chest X-rays, chest computerized
tomography (CT) scans, or oxygen saturation of blood.
While COPD diagnosis and treatment have significantly
improved in the past 15 years, developing and
implementing effective additional preventive and
therapeutic approaches remain the critical focus
for the COPD community.
BY GENDER7
56%
WOMEN
44%
MEN
BY SMOKING HISTORY2
38%
CURRENT
37%
FORMER
OTHER2
25%
OF CASES ARE
NOT ASSOCIATED
WITH DIRECT
CIGARETTE
SMOKING
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

5

HOW YOU MIGHT USE THE
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
To achieve the goals of the COPD National Action Plan, it is
important that all members of the COPD community get involved.
The chart below can help you identify the Action Plan goals most relevant to you.
WHICH GROUP DO YOU IDENTIFY WITH MOST?
Patient, family member, caregiver, or at-risk individual.  Goal 1 and 5.
Patient, family member, caregiver, or at-risk individual.  Goal 1 and 5.
Patient, family member, caregiver, or at-risk individual.  Goal 1 and 5.
Patient, family member, caregiver, or at-risk individual.  Goal 1 and 5.
Advocate or nonprofit.  Goal 1 and 5.
Advocate or nonprofit.  Goal 1 and 5.
Health
professional
Researcher
Policymaker
GOAL 1:
Empower
patients, their
families, and
caregivers to
recognize and
reduce burden of
COPD
PAGE 7
GOAL 2:
Equip health care
professionals
to provide
comprehensive
care to people
with COPD
PAGE 11
GOAL 3:
Collect, analyze,
report, and
disseminate
COPD data
PAGE 17
GOAL 4:
Increase and
sustain COPD
research
PAGE 23
GOAL 5:
Turn COPD
recommendations
into research and
public health care
actions
PAGE 29
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

6

GOAL 1
Empower people with COPD,
their families, and caregivers
to recognize and reduce the
burden of COPD.
7
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

For people with COPD, awareness
about this chronic, progressive
disease often does not come until
well after they have been affected
by it. Unfamiliar with the early, nonspecific
symptoms, many lose significant lung function before
ever seeing a health care provider. It is often not
until a hospitalization, a severe respiratory infection,
or a noticeable impairment in the ability to perform
simple tasks that people living with COPD are
diagnosed. As their symptoms worsen, these patients
face increasingly difficult challenges carrying on the
activities of daily living. They often face daunting
emotional challenges, too. Uncertainty about their
prognosis and their treatment regimens play a role,
as do the anxiety, isolation, depression, and social
stigmas — real or perceived — that often come with
living with the disease. These challenges affect family
members and caregivers alike, and they require
attention, care, and understanding.
The first goal of the COPD National Action Plan
focuses on helping people with COPD, their families,
and caregivers recognize the disease through risk and
symptom awareness, earlier detection, and diagnosis.
It also helps empower these groups by providing
information about how best to manage the disease.
1.	 Increase public awareness of the risk
factors and symptoms of COPD so
that earlier diagnosis of symptomatic
individuals becomes the norm.
a.
Review and fully utilize available COPD information
and tools, as different organizations may already
have resources tailored to their own unique
audiences. Create additional resources where
gaps exist.
b.	 Organize information and resources in a range
of formats that are culturally relevant to diverse
populations, consider health literacy, and ensure
the widest possible access.
c.
Make the information easily accessible by offering
online search capabilities and toll-free access to
specially trained operators, peer associates, and
experienced COPD health professionals.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
8

d.	 Expand access to online communities that people
with COPD and their caregivers use to share
information and support each other.
e.
Ensure that health care professionals provide
people with COPD and their caregivers multiple
avenues that lead to free, reliable, and up-to-date
COPD information and resources.
f.
Include information to help people with COPD
navigate available support programs that provide
assistance when they are unable to afford
their treatments.
2.	 Increase the effectiveness and variety of
outreach communication campaigns and
activities that utilize evidence-based
approaches to raise awareness of COPD,
particularly among those at high risk,
and help people diagnosed with COPD
manage the disease.
a.
Include messages that focus on risk factors
(e.g., smoking, environmental and occupational
exposure, and genetic conditions like AAT
deficiency), stating what actions should be taken
by those at risk and which behavioral interventions
(e.g., tobacco cessation, exercise, and nutrition)
are available. Include specific messages that help
people with COPD and their caregivers manage
the disease.
b.	 Use earned and paid media, online social networks,
and other engaging methods to inform individuals
and communities at risk for COPD. This could
include metrics to measure the communication
impact on health care outcomes (e.g., attendance
at health fairs, more outlets writing about NIH/
CDC-promoted research, and patient narratives).
c.
Invest in evaluation research that develops
and measures the effectiveness of outreach
campaigns. The research should include metrics
that measure the scope and health impact of these
efforts on patients themselves.
3.	 Expand opportunities to increase COPD
awareness across the public-private
spectrum.
a.
Identify and engage diverse organizations,
including community-based groups, minority
health-focused groups, faith-based networks, and
groups responsible for public health initiatives, so
they can integrate COPD education and awareness
activities into their programs.
b.	 Coordinate existing federal COPD education
efforts to ensure that all overarching messages
about COPD awareness, prevention, detection,
care, and treatment are aligned, comprehensive,
and adequately addressed.
c.
Increase awareness of the evidence supporting
prevention strategies and the value of policies
that limit exposure to tobacco and increase access
to tobacco-cessation services. These strategies
should include but not be limited to:
•	 Smoke-free policies
•	 Tobacco-free campuses
(businesses, hospitals, etc.)
•	 Tobacco price increases
•	 Media campaigns
•	 Smoking-cessation promotion and outreach
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 1
9

GOAL 1: OPPORTUNITIES FOR
ENGAGEMENT AND PARTICIPATION
Share culturally and
linguistically appropriate
COPD risk assessment tools
and educational materials
with people with COPD
and their families, friends,
colleagues, and
community members.

10

GOAL 2
Improve the prevention,
diagnosis, treatment, and
management of COPD by
improving the quality of care
delivered across the health
care continuum.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
11

Almost every health care
professional in the United States is
in a position to address the needs of
the millions of people at risk for or
living with COPD. To achieve Goal 2 of the
COPD National Action Plan, health care professionals
should collaborate to standardize existing training,
clinical care tools, and practices and incorporate them
into a new set of national standards of care guidelines.
These tools and practices should then be used to
help provide high-quality, patient-centered, and
multidisciplinary, team-based approaches to COPD
prevention, care, and treatment, and they should
regularly be reviewed and updated. New technologies,
tools, and model programs should also be developed
and studied to address existing gaps in diagnosis
and care.
Tools, practices, and national guidelines should be
evidence-based, validated, and culturally appropriate
so that every individual with COPD can fully engage in
his or her own care. The implementation of these tools
should be coordinated across medical disciplines and
include training designed to address the needs of
people at risk for or living with COPD. The importance
of smoking cessation and pulmonary rehabilitation
as therapeutic interventions should be made central
to evidence-based patient care. Finally, all these
recommendations should be translated into research,
practice, or public health care actions, as outlined
in Goal 5.
An initial review and assessment of care-delivery-
focused initiatives, such as new and existing clinical
practice guidelines, medical-professional training
programs, and quality-improvement programs, will
greatly help in achieving this goal, as it will inform the
further development of specific COPD programs. The
establishment of benchmarks and metrics to monitor
accomplishments will help achieve this goal as well.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
12

1.	 Develop, disseminate, and maintain
unified, multidisciplinary, and
patient-centric national guidelines
for COPD that are accessible and
easy to follow.
a.
Building upon existing COPD guidelines, like those
available from the American Thoracic Society
(ATS, www.thoracic.org/statements/copd.php)
and the Global Initiative for Chronic Lung Disease
(GOLD, www.goldcopd.org), create clinical
practice guidelines that set consistent national
standards for identifying people at risk for COPD
as well as diagnosing, caring for, and treating
people with COPD across the care continuum.
b.	 Ensure that all clinical practice guidelines
address COPD, reflect the latest evidence-based
practices, and meet the Institute of Medicine’s
Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical
Practice Guidelines.
c.
Ensure that new evidence-based COPD clinical
practice guidelines, related summaries, and
companion materials are widely available to
health care professionals by posting them on
the appropriate department websites.
d.	 Collaborate with federal and nonfederal
stakeholders to identify and disseminate current
guidelines for best practices for COPD prevention,
care, and treatment.
e.
Explore ways for the COPD community to
broaden its programs to increase awareness and
understanding of clinical practice guidelines, with
a particular focus on implementation in primary
health care settings. In addition, work with specialty
medical organizations to develop a national
certification program that will support a trained
workforce, including primary health care providers, in
the medical evaluation, management, and treatment
of people at risk for or diagnosed with COPD.
2.	 Develop a unified, multidisciplinary
educational curriculum for health care
professionals, including primary health
care providers, using harmonized
clinical practice guidelines.
a.
Assess, create, and distribute educational curricula
aimed at improving COPD prevention, care,
and treatment. These curricula should be used
across multiple health professional disciplines,
with a focus on underserved and hard-to-reach
populations, and areas with high COPD prevalence.
b.	 Ensure that the curricula are easy to access and
updated regularly to reflect evidence-based best
practices for the diagnosis, care, and treatment
of COPD, as well as policies related to access to
health care services.
c.
Develop and disseminate educational programs,
materials, and tools in collaboration with
primary care organizations, health professional
associations, and patient- and community-based
groups (e.g., continuing medical education
[CME] courses, national certifications, and
educational events).
d.	 Provide COPD training opportunities for federal
and state employees working in public health and
direct-care programs, including community health
workers, pharmacists, and nurses.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 2
13

3.	 Develop, in accordance with clinical
quality measures, a clinical decision tree
and other tools to enable high-quality
care for people with COPD.
a.
Improve ways to identify people at risk for or
living with early COPD and promote the adoption
of accurate diagnostic methodologies, including
testing for AAT deficiency, as a national standard
of care.
b.	 Collaborate with health insurance plans to ensure
their providers and health care professionals
are knowledgeable about; are trained in;
and, ultimately, adopt the COPD diagnostic
recommendations and procedures using the
resources available.
c.
Develop a standardized COPD prompt for health
care professionals to include in a patient’s health
assessments and management file, and, ultimately,
in the patient’s electronic health records (EHRs)
and his or her personal health records (PHRs).
d.	 Create and validate COPD diagnostics with input
from federal agencies and their partners, industry,
and other organizations. The new diagnostics
should distinguish the etiology and pathogenesis
of a patient’s illness to help tailor treatment and
management (personalized medicine) and should
be designed for use wherever a patient seeks care.
4.	 Develop and encourage the use
of a written, patient-centric COPD
management plan tool, with
appropriate cultural and health
literacy considerations, which can be
customized with input from the patient’s
health care provider(s). This plan should
include the following:
•	 A patient’s daily treatment, such as which
medicines to take, when, and why to take
them; how to control COPD long term; how
to handle worsening COPD or exacerbations;
when and how to use oxygen therapy and
physical therapy; the importance of medication
adherence; and what a patient could expect
from optimal therapy and pulmonary-
rehabilitation treatments
•	 An explanation about when to call a health
care professional or go to an emergency room;
how to recognize the impact of the patient’s
comorbidities, like lung cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and depression/anxiety; and how to
treat and manage those comorbidities
•	 Resources for additional information or
assistance, including referrals to patient-
support services and customized support
for patients who continue to consume
tobacco products
•	 Evidence-based resources that can guide
provider and patient conversations, in part
by featuring visual aids to help explain COPD,
including the signs and symptoms and
associated risks, such as exposure to tobacco,
environmental and occupational factors, and
genetic factors like AAT deficiency
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 2
14

•	 Information presented in simple, brief formats
that are in accordance with health literacy
principles, provide culturally appropriate
knowledge and understanding for people with
COPD, and are medically appropriate for health
care professionals
•	 Information about the appropriate use of
spirometry and new diagnostics tools, such as
molecular diagnostics and CT scanning, as they
are developed
5.	 Improve access to care for people with
COPD, particularly for those in hard-to-
reach areas.
a.
Create, validate, and implement best practices
for the prompt referral of newly diagnosed
COPD patients to appropriate services, including
pulmonary rehabilitation, smoking-cessation
programs, anxiety and depression management,
affordable pharmacological treatment, and
palliative care.
b.	 Improve awareness of quality pulmonary-
rehabilitation treatment available through
Medicare, Medicaid, and private health insurance.
Additional recommendations include the following:
i.
Adapt pulmonary-rehabilitation regulations to
facilitate broader access to programs outside
the hospital setting.
ii.
Consider opportunities to identify novel ways
to help health care providers start and sustain
pulmonary-rehabilitation programs and retain
patients through the full course of the program
— for example, by promoting awareness of best
practices and evidence-based guidelines.
c.
Improve the affordability of pharmacological
treatments for COPD.
i.
Discourage substituting, for nonmedical
reasons, one prescription for an inhaled COPD
treatment for another.
ii.
Identify novel ways to encourage medication
adherence to prescribed treatments.
iii.
Expand access to prescription drug assistance
for the uninsured and underinsured, with
priority given to those requiring multiple
prescriptions per month.
iv.
Facilitate U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) qualification of biomarkers for COPD
drug development in order to speed novel
treatments to market.
d.	 Provide coverage and adopt regulations for
providing oxygen therapy that meet the full
clinical needs of COPD patients and permit
ongoing mobility.
e.
Encourage the development of COPD-specific
technologies (e.g., telemedicine, wearable devices,
and mobile technology applications) by federal
agencies, their partners, private industry, and
other interested organizations. These technologies
may improve coordination and personalization
of patient care and encourage more effective
comprehensive management.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 2
15

GOAL 2: OPPORTUNITIES FOR
ENGAGEMENT AND PARTICIPATION

16

GOAL 3
Collect, analyze, report, and
disseminate COPD-related
public health data that drive
change and track progress.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
17

Reliable data are critical for
informed decision-making. This is
especially so when creating health care resources and
when measuring the success of new risk-identification
methods, early detection methods, health care policies,
and care-delivery efforts. Health data that measure the
prevalence and characteristics of COPD, patterns of
treatment, and patient outcomes form the basis for
the effective prevention and diagnosis of COPD as
well as for the treatment of people at risk for or
living with the disease.
Goal 3 of the COPD National Action Plan addresses
the need to close data gaps by encouraging increased
and coordinated data collection, validation, analyses,
sharing, and real-world application of these data as
they are collected. The adoption of secure health
information technology (HIT), the use of EHRs/PHRs,
and the creation of large-scale patient registries can
greatly enhance the ability to capture and collect
patient-level data. The National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS), part of the CDC, conducts the
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES),
the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey
(NAMCS), the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical
Care Survey (NHAMCS), and the National Hospital
Care Survey (NHCS). NCHS also collects mortality
records through the National Vital Statistics System.
These data-collection systems represent the foremost
sources of population surveillance data.11 Other
population data, including data from U.S. Census
Bureau surveys, the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System (BRFSS), and NCHS provider surveys, could
also reveal trends that spur new policies, resource
allocations, or budget modifications.
Data needs may be addressed if federal and
nonfederal partners consider developing new
infrastructures and alliances within their existing
organizations. This kind of development could have
a far-reaching effect, inspiring new ways to assess
COPD prevalence and engage in predictive modeling
more broadly. The stakeholders involved in these
efforts also must ensure widespread and meaningful
dissemination of data analyses.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
18

1.	 Enhance and optimize our capacity
to collect and aggregate data from
multiple sources, including at local,
regional, and national levels, and turn
them into actionable information.
a.
Develop standardized data-collection methods
using harmonized definitions and core indicators
to monitor the prevalence, care, and treatment
of people with COPD, including those with
AAT deficiency.
i.
Strengthen the surveillance and reporting
capacity of state and local health departments
by urging primary care providers to collect
and report COPD surveillance data to
these authorities.
ii.
Improve the accessibility of EHRs/PHRs,
claims data, pharmacy-benefit data,
patient reported-outcomes data, and other
electronic data for use in COPD surveillance
and measurement efforts.
iii.
Upgrade surveillance information technology
as a way to improve the exchange of data
among reporting entities, such as health
systems; state and local health departments;
and agencies such as the CDC, the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and the
Veterans Health Administration (VHA).
iv.
Conduct surveys and special studies designed
to investigate populations at risk, occupational
and environmental factors, geographic
variations (e.g., rural versus urban), disease
attributes (e.g., lung function and physical
function), demographic factors (e.g., gender,
age, and ethnicity), access to care, and
other disparities in health services for
people with COPD.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 3
19

b.	 Improve data compatibility for aggregation
and analyses.
i.
Enlist federal and nonfederal partners to
develop protocols for the collection, storage,
and sharing of COPD data from various
sources; to help ensure that the data analyses
draw from these sources, including clinical-trial
data, observational data, and patient-registry
data, as well as protocols and algorithms, in the
collection efforts.
ii.
Utilize aggregated data to describe how COPD
and related prevention, care, and treatment
programs influence health and morbidity.
iii.
Incorporate International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) codes into COPD surveillance,
and ensure that COPD diagnostic codes
(ICD-9, ICD-10, and thereafter) are required
for EHR certification.
c.
Capture and analyze surveillance data from people
with COPD, identify trends to better predict the
prevalence and burden of COPD, and accurately
describe the public health impact.
i.
Comprehensively and regularly monitor
the prevalence and incidence of COPD at
the national, state, and local levels.
ii.
Monitor the use and impact of validated
assessment tools to detect and diagnose
COPD, particularly in at-risk populations.
iii.
Assess the national availability and use of
pulmonary-rehabilitation services using CMS,
VHA, and commercial-payer data; this can
assist with interventions designed to target
underserved areas.
iv.
Monitor the delivery and impact of
COPD care and treatment, including
pulmonary rehabilitation.
v.
Monitor and assess the relationship
between comorbidities and COPD
morbidity and mortality.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 3
20

2.	 Facilitate dissemination of data
and analyses.
a.
Report findings of federal COPD surveillance
initiatives in a biannual report on the national
burden of COPD in the United States, including
prevalence, mortality, related health indicators,
and care-delivery measurements.
i.
Regularly report COPD surveillance data
through established federal channels
(e.g., CDC surveillance reports and Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality [AHRQ]
briefs) then make that data available to the
public in an easily accessible format.
ii.
Proactively disseminate the findings of COPD
surveillance studies to diverse stakeholders.
iii.
Encourage federal and nonfederal
partners to publish outcomes of COPD
data analyses using scientific-exchange
(e.g., peer-review) opportunities.
b.	 Conduct studies that assess all aspects of
existing and new models of detection, care,
and treatment for people living with COPD,
including studies addressing barriers to care
and rehabilitation services.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 3
21

GOAL 3: OPPORTUNITIES FOR
ENGAGEMENT AND PARTICIPATION

22

GOAL 4
Increase and sustain
research to better
understand the prevention,
pathogenesis, diagnosis,
treatment, and management
of COPD.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
23

With this goal, the COPD National
Action Plan focuses on the need to
characterize the many contributing
risk factors and underlying
mechanisms in COPD. This goal aims to
improve understanding of the causes and progression
of COPD; the different forms of the disease; and its
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. Translation
of basic research to clinical applications can yield
improved methods of diagnosis and symptom
management, as well as treatments that are health-
preserving and disease-arresting or -reversing.
Of particular importance is research aimed at
improving the identification of people at risk for
COPD and those in the early stages of COPD
development, since early detection provides the
best opportunity for disease management.
Despite what is known about the association between
smoking and COPD, other, lesser-known and unknown
causes of COPD do exist. Because COPD develops,
progresses, and manifests in different ways, many
factors likely influence how people with COPD respond
to treatment. Therefore, research supported by the
Precision Medicine Initiative, and NHLBI COPD efforts
like the COPDGene and SPIROMICS projects, could
help unravel the underlying biology and, coupled with
advanced imaging, allow for a better understanding
of the different COPD clinical phenotypes, the role
of comorbidities, and the efficacy and safety of
interventions and treatments at an individual level.
Such patient-powered research holds promise for the
acceleration of COPD discoveries and will provide
health care professionals with new tools, knowledge,
and targeted therapies that make it easier to choose
the treatments best suited for each individual
with COPD.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
24

1.	 Help expand, coordinate, and optimize
COPD research efforts.
a.
Advance short- and long-term priorities across all
phases of COPD research. This should leverage
synergistic partnerships and include the following:
i.
Characterization of the biological basis of
COPD, including genetic, environmental,
and occupational risk factors; molecular and
cellular systems involved in pathobiology;
and the pathophysiological mechanisms of
symptom development, disease progression,
and comorbidities.
ii.
Identification of biomarkers and
clinical measures useful for the early
detection, prognosis, and targeting of
precise therapeutics.
iii.
Development and testing of therapies,
especially those involving novel molecular
targets or specific groups of patients.
iv.
Implementation of effective approaches for
diagnosis and treatment in ways that maximize
the impact on public health and are accessible
to everyone in the United States.
b.	 Encourage more patients and underrepresented
populations to participate in all types of research,
including patient registry efforts and clinical trials.
c.
Improve access to databases and patient-centered
registries for use in research.
i.
Use aggregated patient EHRs and real-
world observational data to monitor how
patients with COPD are diagnosed, cared
for, and treated.
ii.
Share secure, anonymized clinical trial data
(culled from shared data repositories) for use
in secondary analyses.
iii.
Facilitate cross-communication among
scientists, practicing health care professionals,
and patients throughout the research process
(research planning, participant recruitment,
study execution, and dissemination and
adoption of results).
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 4
25

2.	 Improve methods for earliest detection
and diagnosis and develop effective
strategies for preventing the onset and
progression of COPD.
a.
Improve the quality of COPD detection and
diagnostic technologies, and increase the use
of validated technologies as alternatives to
spirometry, in clinical and other settings. This can
be done by developing and defining performance
measures for COPD risk identification and earliest
detection. These efforts would be informed by
scientific evidence and with input from patients,
professional and medical organizations, private
industry, and other relevant stakeholders.
b.	 Encourage the development of new, highly
sensitive and rapid diagnostics tools, such as those
that identify biomarkers, and encourage their use
in molecular diagnostics. Additionally, enable the
submission of biomarkers for FDA approval so they
can be used in clinical trials and practice.
c.
Improve the quality of COPD prevention strategies
for people at risk.
i.
Develop and test models for detecting
COPD that can be adapted and used in
different health care settings and with
diverse populations; these models will help
identify and reach people at risk for COPD,
including nonsmokers and those with a genetic
predisposition, such as AAT deficiency, those
being screened for lung cancer, and those with
concurrent asthma.
ii.
Develop and test COPD interventions, including
those related to nutrition and behavior, in
home and routine care settings; this can help
determine how to modify risk factors for
COPD, reduce the frequency or severity of
exacerbations, and prevent the progression
of the disease.
iii.
Use community-based research to pilot-test
the effectiveness of detection and prevention
programs designed to reach underserved and
culturally diverse populations and those at risk
for COPD.
3.	 Define and characterize the
pathogenesis of COPD heterogeneity.
a.
Facilitate and encourage basic science
research about the underlying mechanisms
that contribute to the development of different
COPD clinical phenotypes.
i.
Develop and apply new animal models, cell
models, and human-tissue resources to explore
the full range of causes of COPD.
ii.
Collect and analyze genomic and biomarker
data to further characterize COPD phenotypes.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 4
26

4.	 Develop personalized medicine for
COPD based on the pathogenesis and
clinical heterogeneity.
a.
Facilitate and encourage the translation of basic
science COPD etiology and pathogenesis studies
into epidemiology and clinical research involving
patients with different COPD phenotypes.
i.
Develop and validate new diagnostic tests to
screen people by COPD phenotype who are at
risk for or already diagnosed with the disease;
this will help refine personalized care and
treatment programs.
ii.
Develop and test new precision medicine
treatments for people diagnosed with COPD
based on COPD phenotypes.
iii.
Develop new care programs for people
diagnosed with COPD based on COPD
phenotypes for their use in health care and
other settings.
iv.
Include the full spectrum of people with COPD,
comprehensive of AAT-deficient patients, in
clinical studies.
5.	 Promote research that can lead
to strategies that help prevent the
onset and progression of COPD and
improve the quality of COPD care
and management.
a.
Investigate how access to care affects the
treatment for people diagnosed with COPD.
i.
Study the clinical effectiveness of patient-
centered treatments, including quality of life
and functionality as outcome measures.
ii.
Conduct research on the progression of
subclinical disease to overt disease.
iii.
Conduct research to identify the most effective
structure and components of a pulmonary-
rehabilitation program, including the most
effective length and number of sessions, the
effects of different educational components
and delivery strategies, and the most effective
way to provide rehabilitation in rural areas.
b.	 Support clinical effectiveness and treatment-
outcomes research to obtain findings that can be
translated into models of care that then can be
tested and adapted for use in different health care
and clinical settings (T3/T4 research12).
c.
Conduct research on the effectiveness of COPD-
focused policies and programs.
i.
Evaluate COPD-focused policies, public
health interventions, and programs by
using predefined, evidence-based
performance metrics.
ii.
Develop value-based return-on-investment
models using research that describes the
effectiveness of current COPD programs
and policies.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 4
27

GOAL 4: OPPORTUNITIES FOR
ENGAGEMENT AND PARTICIPATION
Invest in, facilitate, and
promote basic, clinical, and
applied research to improve
the diagnosis and treatment
of people with COPD; assess
the impact of the home
environment on patient
management and treatment.
Create COPD patient
registries that help evaluate
and improve patient
management, clinical care,
and treatment.

COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
28

GOAL 5
Translate national policy,
educational, and program
recommendations into
research and public health
care actions.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
29

This goal calls for federal and
nonfederal partners to collaborate
to meet the objectives of the COPD
National Action Plan and translate
its recommendations into actions.
All involved need to work together to make funding
available for a variety of activities and allow all
interested to participate.
1.	 Put into action prevention strategies
that are proven effective in addressing
the 80 percent of COPD deaths due
to smoking.7
a.
Support initiatives and activities that promote a
tobacco-free society. Evidence-based approaches
already exist and include, but are not limited
to, smoke-free and tobacco-free policies,
large-scale, strategically-placed media
campaigns, and tobacco price increases.
2.	 Create a collaborative official entity
that implements, prioritizes, and
tracks activities in accordance with
the COPD National Action Plan’s
goals and objectives.
a.
Create an official entity tasked to oversee and
support the implementation and tracking of the
COPD National Action Plan. This entity should be
established with the following considerations:
i.
Hosted and supported by the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) and include
representatives from federal and nonfederal
partners, including patients; and permit regular
engagement to foster the collaboration and
coordination of efforts.
ii.
Charged with prioritizing and tracking the
five goals of the COPD National Action Plan
through biannual reporting; implementation of
tactics will be the responsibility of federal and
nonfederal partners, as outlined in the COPD
National Action Plan.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
30

iii.
Encumbered with an equal governance role for
patients and caregivers affected by COPD.
iv.
Composed of, minimally, representatives
from the CDC (including its National Centers
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion [NCCDPHP] and the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
[NIOSH]), CMS, NIH (NHLBI), the Department
of Defense (DoD), VHA, the Health Resources
and Services Administration (HRSA),
and AHRQ.
3.	 Identify and publicize funding
opportunities that advance the
implementation of the COPD National
Action Plan.
a.
Develop an easily accessible resource guide to
COPD research-funding opportunities offered by
federal and nonfederal partners, including patient
registries and other channels that speed access to
clinical trials. In particular, increase the awareness
and visibility of investigator-initiated research
about COPD, including AAT deficiency.
b.	 Develop and implement a process for
including new nonfederal funding partners,
such as public-private advisory boards, in
the resource guide.
c.
Develop a mechanism to regularly share
resources and funding opportunities with all
interested parties (e.g., via a dedicated website
or newsletter).
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 5
31

4.	 Develop and implement COPD quality
measures into national care delivery.
a.
Use existing and still-developing performance-
quality measures that are informed by
scientific evidence and input from various
COPD stakeholders (e.g., payers, professional
associations, medical organizations, private
industry, and patient advocacy organizations).
Then work with federal agencies to encourage
the adoption of those measures to improve COPD
detection, care, and treatment in health care
settings and payer programs.
i.
Define, validate, and disseminate
performance-quality measures for the
COPD continuum of care, including
measurements for patient services in
private and public health plans, pulmonary
rehabilitation, and associated reimbursements.
ii.
Encourage health systems to incorporate
COPD into current health and community
assessments, such as the Community Health
Needs Assessment Surveys.
iii.
Obtain patient input when developing new
quality measures and new alternative-payment
models and treatment guidelines. This
feedback will help ensure that care remains
patient-centered and tailored to help
patients achieve their goals.
5.	 Strengthen the public health
infrastructure for addressing COPD.
a.
Support all 50 states, the District of Columbia,
and U.S. territories in the development of
comprehensive, statewide COPD action plans
that include public health interventions, patient
education efforts, and the creation of
public-private partnerships to implement the
initiatives specified within the individual state
plans and the COPD National Action Plan.
b.	 Incorporate COPD into state and local health
department programs that focus on chronic
disease prevention, tobacco prevention, general
health promotion and education, and other
relevant health initiatives.
c.
Improve the delivery and coordination of
community services to support COPD patients.
d.	 Use the Whole School, Whole Community, and
Whole Child Model to address tobacco use and
other risk factors for COPD.
e.
Create a formal, standardized national
certificate program for COPD peer coaches
and health educators.
f.
Incorporate COPD into prevention, awareness,
surveillance, and management programs that
encompass the range of risk factors and common
comorbidities of COPD.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
Goal 5
32

GOAL 5: OPPORTUNITIES FOR
ENGAGEMENT AND PARTICIPATION

COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
34

ORGANIZATIONS
The organizations below represent groups and federal partners that attended the COPD Town Hall Meeting and/
or provided comments to the draft COPD National Action Plan during the public comment period.
NAME
DESCRIPTION
Agency for
Healthcare
Research and
Quality
Government
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality strives to make health care safer, better, and
more accessible. The agency works with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and
partners to ensure that evidence-based research is used to improve the delivery of health care
in the United States. In addition to funding health delivery system research, the agency offers
resources that support people with chronic health conditions and that help empower patients and
families through shared decision-making.
›› www.ahrq.gov
All About You
Homecare Services
Health Care Organization
All About You Homecare Services is a nurse-owned and -operated agency offering skilled nursing,
physical therapy, occupational therapy, respiratory therapy evaluation, and home health aides. All
About You specializes in caring for patients with respiratory disease using a pulmonary pathway.
It offers referrals for outpatient pulmonary rehabilitation, support groups, and 90-day follow up
phone calls to those in treatment.
›› www.aayct.com
Alpha-1 Foundation
Nonprofit
The Alpha-1 Foundation promotes research and the development of new therapies for improving
the quality of life for those diagnosed with alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency. The foundation
is committed to finding a cure for AAT deficiency and improving the lives of people affected
worldwide.
›› www.alpha1.org
American Academy
of Family Physicians
Health Care Professional
Association
The American Academy of Family Physicians advocates for high quality standards for family
doctors. It is one of the world’s largest medical organizations, with nearly 125,000 members in 50
states and abroad. The association was founded in 1947.
›› www.aafp.org
American
Association for
Respiratory Care
Health Care Professional
Association
The American Association for Respiratory Care advances the science and practice of respiratory
care, encourages and promotes professional excellence, and serves as an advocate for patients
and their families, the public, and the respiratory care profession.
›› www.aarc.org
American
Association of
Cardiovascular
and Pulmonary
Rehabilitation
Health Care Professional
Association
The American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation is composed of health
professionals who work in the field of cardiac and pulmonary rehabilitation. Members include
cardiovascular and pulmonary physicians, nurses, exercise physiologists, physical therapists,
behavioral scientists, respiratory therapists, dieticians, and nutritionists.
›› www.aacvpr.org
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

35

NAME
DESCRIPTION
American College
of Allergy, Asthma,
and Immunology
Health Care Professional
Association
The American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology advocates for those suffering from
asthma and allergies, and educates the public about symptoms and allergist care and treatment.
›› www.acaai.org
American College
of Chest Physicians
Health Care Professional
Association
The American College of Chest Physicians seeks to advance best patient outcomes through
innovative chest medicine education and clinical research.
›› www.chestnet.org
American College
of Preventive
Medicine
Health Care Professional
Association
The American College of Preventive Medicine focuses on the health of communities, individuals,
and populations through the work of physicians dedicated to prevention. Its goal is to protect,
promote, and maintain health and well-being, and to prevent disease, disability, and death.
›› www.acpm.org
American Lung
Association
Nonprofit
The American Lung Association is committed to supporting those affected by COPD. The
association offers a variety of resources and information about the disease. Resources include
Better Breathers Clubs, COPD Management Plan, and a Living with COPD Online Support
Community for those affected and their families. The association is a source for lung health
education, lung disease research, support, programs, services, and advocacy.
›› www.lung.org
American Thoracic
Society
Health Care Professional
Association
The American Thoracic Society is dedicated to understanding pulmonary diseases, critical
illnesses, and sleep-related breathing disorders. Founded in 1905, the society has grown into an
international society with more than 15,000 members.
›› www.thoracic.org
Ascension
Health Care Organization
Ascension is the largest nonprofit health system in the United States and the world’s largest
Catholic health system, operating 2,500 sites of care — including 141 hospitals and more than
30 senior living facilities — in 24 states and the District of Columbia. Ascension is committed
to delivering compassionate, personalized care to all, with special attention to persons living in
poverty and others in vulnerable situations.
›› www.stagnes.org
AstraZeneca
Industry
AstraZeneca counts respiratory disease as one of its main therapy areas, as evidenced by its
growing portfolio of respiratory medicines. In 2015, those treatments reached more than 17
million patients. AstraZeneca aims to transform asthma and COPD treatment through inhaled
combinations for those needing basic care, biologics for the unmet needs of specific patient
populations, and scientific advancements that help with disease modification.
›› www.astrazeneca.com
Atlantic General
Hospital
Health Care Organization
Atlantic General Hospital is a nonprofit community hospital in Berlin, Md., that offers acute care
and specialty services. With a network of more than 30 family physicians, internists, and specialists
with offices in 10 locations throughout the region, the hospital and its health system serve the
health care and wellness needs of residents and visitors across the Eastern Shore.
›› www.atlanticgeneral.org
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

36

NAME
DESCRIPTION
Boehringer
Ingelheim
Industry
Boehringer Ingelheim has been committed for nearly a century to researching the science of
serious respiratory diseases and providing therapies to help people living with them. To treat
COPD, Boehringer Ingelheim has developed six FDA-approved medicines and is committed to
doing more research that could help and support the COPD community further.
›› www.boehringer-ingelheim.com
Breathe Easy Home
Industry
Breathe Easy Home educates homeowners and contractors on ways to improve homes for people
with respiratory issues. It developed the Breathe Easy Home Indoor Air Quality System, which
helps remove allergy and asthma triggers, along with other irritants and pollutants, from a home’s
indoor environment.
›› www.breatheeasyhome.org
BREATHE LA
Advocacy
BREATHE LA, founded in 1903, promotes clean air and lungs through research, education, and
technology. BREATHE LA aims to eliminate causes of lung disease and reduce the pain and
discomfort of those affected by lung diseases in California.
›› www.breathela.org
Breathe New
Hampshire
Nonprofit
Breathe New Hampshire focuses on issues related to lung health, such as tobacco use, COPD,
asthma, air quality, and lung cancer. It provides educational programs and supports public health
advocacy and scientific research focused on preventing, eliminating, and treating lung disease.
›› www.breathenh.org
Carolina Diagnostic
Solutions
Industry
Carolina Diagnostic Solutions provides pulmonary diagnostic equipment, testing supplies, and
asthma and COPD management tools to the health care industry. Additionally, Carolina Diagnostic
Solutions’ respiratory therapists provide a wide range of diagnostic testing, patient education, and
specialized disease management in multiple settings.
›› www.carolinadiagnosticsolutions.com
Carolinas
HealthCare System
Health Care Organization
Carolinas HealthCare System serves nearly 12 million patients each year throughout the Southeast.
It has some 900 locations, ranging from hospitals and freestanding emergency departments to
home health agencies and outpatient centers.
›› www.carolinashealthcare.org
Carroll Hospital
Health Care Organization
Carroll Hospital is a portal of health and wellness, serving the greater Baltimore area. The hospital
aims to improve the health of patients through care management and delivery of high-quality, low-
cost services in the most appropriate settings. Carroll Hospital is a division of LifeBridge Health
and is advancing in areas such as cardiovascular, cancer, surgery, and outpatient services.
›› www.carrollhospitalcenter.org
Case Western
Reserve University
School of Medicine
Academic
Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, in Cleveland, Ohio, is dedicated to enhancing
human health in the fields of medical education and biomedical research and development.
Founded in 1843, the school trains more than 800 students each year.
›› www.case.edu
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

37

NAME
DESCRIPTION
Centers for Disease
Control and
Prevention
Government
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention increases the health security of Americans and
works to protect citizens from health threats. As the nation’s health protection agency, the CDC
conducts surveillance of chronic diseases, including COPD, to better understand the extent of
health risk behaviors, preventive care practices, disease prevalence, disability, and death; to
monitor the progress of prevention efforts; and to help public health professionals and policy
makers make more timely and effective decisions.
›› www.cdc.gov
Centers for
Medicare &
Medicaid Services,
U.S. Department of
Health and Human
Services
Government
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services administers Medicare, Medicaid, the Children’s
Health Insurance Program, and the Health Insurance Marketplace, all of which aim for more
affordable, better care.
›› www.cms.gov
Children’s National
Medical Systems
Health Care Organization
The Children’s National Health System is a children’s health care system in the Washington, D.C.,
area that focuses on clinical care, advocacy, research, and education for children. The system is
dedicated to caring for children, their families, and the community with primary and specialty
health professionals.
›› www.childrensnational.org
Clear Lungs
Adventure
Nonprofit
Clear Lungs Adventure raises awareness for early screening and diagnosis of progressive lung
diseases, while demonstrating the power of older athletes to be role models and ambassadors
for healthy and active living. Clear Lungs Adventure sponsors a series of 12 climbs in seven
destinations for people affected by COPD.
›› www.clearlungsadventure.com
Cleveland Clinic
Respiratory
Institute
Health Care Organization
The Cleveland Clinic Respiratory Institute provides patient care through clinical expertise, research,
and education. With more than 100 pulmonologists, allergists, immunologists, and critical care
specialists, Cleveland Clinic treats a wide range of lung, allergy and breathing-related conditions.
››  www.clevelandclinic.org
Colorado COPD
Coalition
Advocacy
The Colorado COPD Coalition was founded in 2006 and is made up of Colorado health
professionals, patients, research scientists, industry representatives, state officials, and
caregivers. Its mission is to address the health crisis of COPD by increasing awareness,
prevention, and screening.
›› www.coloradocopdcoalition.org
Columbia University
Academic
Columbia University Medical Center provides leadership in scientific research, health and medical
education, and patient care. The center has more than 40 active research and clinical programs.
›› www.cumc.columbia.edu
COPD Foundation
Nonprofit
The COPD Foundation was established to improve the lives of those affected by COPD and is the
only U.S. health care nonprofit solely dedicated to preventing and curing the disease. Founded
in 2004, the foundation focuses on helping those with COPD through research, education, and
advocacy programs. It helps speed innovations that provide more effective and affordable
treatments to those with COPD.
›› www.copdfoundation.org
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

38

NAME
DESCRIPTION
Culpeper Medical
Center
Health Care Organization
The Culpeper Medical Center partners with pediatric and adult pulmonologists who specialize
in treating respiratory disorders. Culpeper Memorial Hospital is part of the University of Virginia
Health System and provides services in all areas of health care.
›› www.uvaculpeperhospital.com
Department of
Veterans Affairs
Government
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) operates the nation’s largest integrated health care
system, with more than 1,700 hospitals, clinics, community living centers, readjustment counseling
centers, and other facilities. The VA provides COPD resources and treatment for people with
the disease.
›› www.va.gov
Dorney-Koppel
Family Charitable
Foundation, Inc.
Nonprofit
The Dorney-Koppel Family Charitable Foundation, founded in 1999, is named for Grace Dorney-
Koppel, wife of television newsman Ted Koppel. Dorney-Koppel, who was diagnosed with COPD
more than 16 years ago, has become a national spokesperson for those with chronic breathing
conditions. The foundation has helped fund the creation of pulmonary and cardiac rehabilitation
clinics in Maryland, West Virginia, Louisiana, and North Carolina.
›› N/A
Duke University
Health System
Academic
The Duke University Health System combines educational, research, policy, and patient care
programs. Duke Health helps manage COPD symptoms through an experienced personal care
team and actively conducts research on COPD treatments.
›› www.dukehealth.org
Emphysema
Foundation For Our
Right To Survive
Nonprofit
The Emphysema Foundation For Our Right To Survive (EFFORTS) is a nonprofit
organization that seeks to support individuals who suffer with emphysema, a chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
›› www.emphysema.net
Erlanger Health
Health Care Organization
Erlanger Health’s pulmonary rehabilitation program aims to help people with restrictive lung
impairments lead more active lives. The certified program involves exercise, education, and
support tailored to meet each patient’s needs.
›› www.erlanger.org
Evidera
Industry
Evidera is dedicated to advancing research and consultation in the life sciences industry and has
worked with 20 biopharmaceutical companies. Evidera scientists and consultants publish more
than 150 peer-reviewed articles each year and have more than 1,100 studies in progress across all
major therapeutic areas.
›› www.evidera.com
Fremont Health
Health Care Organization
Fremont Health is a health system with six clinics throughout Nebraska. More than 100 active
members of its medical staff practice in nearly every medical specialty.
›› www.fremonthealth.com
FutureCare
Health Care Organization
FutureCare is a short-term rehabilitation and nursing care center with 14 facilities throughout
Maryland. Its staff of 3,800 health care professionals serves both patients and families. FutureCare
provides respiratory care to residents through its BreatheStrong pulmonary rehab program.
›› www.futurecare.com
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

39

NAME
DESCRIPTION
George Mason
University
Academic
George Mason University is the largest public research university in Virginia. Partnering with
the National Institutes of Health, researchers from across the university are working to develop
advanced diagnostics and treatments for major life-threatening illnesses, including COPD.
›› www.gmu.edu
Georgetown
University Hospital
Academic
MedStar Georgetown University Hospital is a nonprofit, acute-care teaching and research hospital
in Washington, D.C. Its Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine provides resources
and treatments for people with COPD.
›› www.medstargeorgetown.org
Glaxo Smith Kline
Industry
Glaxo Smith Kline is a global health care company committed to the research and development of
pharmaceutical medicines, vaccines, and consumer health care products. Glaxo Smith Kline seeks
to widen access to their products regardless of where patients live.
›› www.gsk.com
Grifols
Industry
Grifols is a global health care company whose mission is to improve the health and well-being
of people around the world. Grifols has been working in the fields of transfusion, blood banking,
protein therapeutics, and laboratory analysis for more than 75 years.
›› www.grifolsusa.com
Hawaii COPD
Coalition
Nonprofit
The Hawaii COPD Coalition is a nonprofit dedicated to advocacy, education, support, and
resources for those at risk for or suffering from COPD. Formed in 2007, the coalition also offers
practical training and resources for families, caregivers, and health care professionals.
›› www.hawaiicopd.org
Health Resources
and Service
Administration,
U.S. Department
of Health & Human
Services
Government
The Health Resources and Services Administration is the primary federal agency tasked with
improving health and achieving health equity through access to quality services, a skilled
health workforce, and innovative programs. Its programs provide health care to people who are
geographically isolated and economically or medically vulnerable.
›› www.hrsa.gov
Holy Cross Hospital
Health Care Organization
Holy Cross Hospital is a full-service, nonprofit, teaching hospital based in South Florida, with
more than 600 physicians on staff in nearly every specialty in medicine. The hospital offers
inpatient, outpatient, and community outreach services and clinical trials. It also offers a certified
cardiovascular/pulmonary rehabilitation program.
›› www.holy-cross.com
Hospital for Special
Care
Health Care Organization
The Hospital for Special Care is a long-term acute-care hospital in Connecticut that serves both
adults and children. The hospital is recognized for advanced care and rehabilitation in highly
specialized areas, including pulmonary care.
›› www.hfsc.org
HumanKind
Nonprofit
HumanKind, founded in 1903 in Virginia, aims to strengthen individuals and families through care,
counseling, and education.
›› www.humankind.org
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

40

NAME
DESCRIPTION
Indian Health
Service, U.S.
Department of
Health and Human
Services
Government
The Indian Health Service is the principal federal health care provider and health advocate for
Indian people and Alaska Natives. The Indian Health Service provides a comprehensive health
service delivery system for approximately 2.2 million American Indians and Alaska Natives who
belong to 567 federally recognized tribes in 36 states.
›› www.ihs.gov
Inova
Health Care Organization
Inova is a nonprofit health care system that serves more than 2 million people each year
throughout the Washington, D.C. metro area and beyond. Based in Northern Virginia and
governed by a volunteer board of community members, Inova has grown from one hospital in 1956
to a nationally recognized, comprehensive network of hospitals, outpatient services and facilities,
primary and specialty care physician practices, and health and wellness initiatives.
›› www.inova.org
J. Craig Venter
Institute
Health Care Organization
The J. Craig Venter Institute was formed in October 2006 through the merger of several affiliated
and legacy organizations — the Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) and the Center for the
Advancement of Genomics (TCAG), the J. Craig Venter Science Foundation, the Joint Technology
Center, and the Institute for Biological Energy Alternatives (IBEA). Today, all these organizations
have become one large multidisciplinary genomic-focused organization.
›› www.jcvi.org
JFK Medical Center
Health Care Organization
The JFK Medical Center is based in Atlantis, Fla., and was established in 1966. The medical center
has evolved into a multi-campus medical center with four locations.
›› www.jfkmc.com
Johns Hopkins
University Hospital
Academic
The Johns Hopkins University Hospital is the teaching hospital and biomedical research arm of the
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, located in Baltimore, Md.
›› www.jhu.edu
Kaiser Permanente
Health Care Organization
Kaiser Permanente provides health care to more than 9 million people with multiple plans. For
more than 60 years Kaiser Permanente has been committed to reaching the community and
promoting health and wellness through its plans and facilities.
›› www.kaiserpermanente.org
Kindred Healthcare
Health Care Organization
Kindred Healthcare’s Nursing and Rehabilitation Centers provide pulmonary care to help patients
breathe easier. Kindred Healthcare treats a variety of conditions, including COPD, and offers
patients individualized care and access to nurses trained in respiratory management and healthy
lifestyle programs.
›› www.kindredhealthcare.com
Lincoln Health
Foundation
Nonprofit
The Lincoln Health Foundation, located in Lincoln Parish, La., seeks to improve the quality of life
for patients and develop initiatives and programs that facilitate health and wellness.
›› www.lincolnhealth.com
Living Healthy
Health Care Organization
Living Healthy seeks to change behavior through education. It provides nurse consulting services,
workshops, CPR training, and health and safety inspections. Living Healthy partners with
organizations to equip and inform them on health and safety.
›› www.livinghealthyinc.com
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

41

NAME
DESCRIPTION
MD/DC Society for
Respiratory Care
Health Care Professional
Association
The MD/DC Society for Respiratory Care provides support, educational opportunities, and
legislative monitoring for respiratory care professionals in Maryland and the District of Columbia.
›› www.mddcsoc.org
Medical University
of South Carolina
Academic
The Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) is a hospital and academic medical center in
South Carolina. MUSC seeks to provide quality health care through its dedication to patient care,
academics, and research.
›› www.musc.edu
MedStar Family
Choice
Health Care Organization
MedStar Family Choice is a provider-sponsored managed care organization servicing Medicaid
programs in the District of Columbia and the state of Maryland. With 42,000 members, the
MedStar network consists of 3,000 physicians and health care providers.
›› www.medstarfamilychoice.com
Monadnock
Community
Hospital
Health Care Organization
Monadnock Community Hospital, founded in 1923, is a 25-bed critical access hospital offering
medical, surgical, and intensive care services, including pulmonary care.
›› www.monadnockcommunityhospital.com
Mount Sinai Health
System
Health Care Organization
Mount Sinai Health System is a group practice offering the experience of more than 100 physicians
with personalized and integrated treatment for patients. Mount Sinai specializes in clinical services,
and offers a pulmonary rehabilitation program that helps patients manage and improve their COPD,
learn more about their disease, and increase their endurance and ability to enjoy daily living.
›› www.mountsinai.org
Mylan
Industry
Mylan is a generics and specialty pharmaceutical company, with sales in approximately 165
countries and territories. Mylan was founded in 1961 and seeks to provide new generics to
the market.
›› www.mylan.com
National Cancer
Institute, Division of
Cancer Prevention
Government
The National Cancer Institute’s Division of Cancer Prevention focuses on cancer prevention
research. Providing funding and administrative support to clinical and laboratory researchers, its
goal is to detect changes and intervene early to prevent cancer in major organs.
›› www.prevention.cancer.gov
National Center
on Addiction and
Substance Abuse
Nonprofit
The National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse is a research organization focused on
improving the understanding, prevention, and treatment of substance use and addiction.
›› www.centeronaddiction.org
National
Development and
Research Institutes
Nonprofit
The National Development and Research Institutes, Inc. was founded in 1967 to advance the
understanding of factors that affect the health of individuals, communities, and other populations.
›› www.ndri.org
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

42

NAME
DESCRIPTION
National
Emphysema
Foundation
Nonprofit
The National Emphysema Foundation aims to improve the quality of life in patients with
emphysema and their caregivers by providing educational, advocacy, and research initiatives to
the medical community and the general public. The foundation is dedicated to reducing the toll
emphysema takes on people around the globe.
›› www.emphysemafoundation.org
National Heart,
Lung, and Blood
Institute
Government
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health, plans,
conducts, and supports research related to the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of
heart, blood vessel, lung, and blood diseases; and sleep disorders. The Institute also administers
national health education campaigns on women and heart disease, COPD, and other topics.
›› www.nhlbi.nih.gov
National Institute
of Environmental
Health Sciences
Government
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences is a research institute that is part of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Its mission is to discover how the environment
affects people and to educate the public on how to live healthier lives.
›› www.niehs.nih.gov
National Institute of
Nursing Research
Government
The National Institute of Nursing Research seeks to improve the health and health care of
Americans through the funding of nursing research and research training. Its mission is to promote
and improve the health of all individuals.
›› www.ninr.nih.gov
National Institute
on Aging, Division
of Geriatrics
and Clinical
Gerontology
Government
The National Institute on Aging is dedicated to understanding aging, supporting the health and
well-being of older adults, and helping people live longer, healthier, and more active lives. The
National Institute on Aging is focused on discovering the factors that contribute to healthy aging,
as well as to understanding and addressing some of the diseases and disabilities associated with
growing older.
›› www.nia.nih.gov
National Jewish
Health
Health Care Organization
National Jewish Health is a hospital in Denver, Co., where every doctor on staff is also a researcher.
The hospital treats pulmonary diseases using a program customized for each patient.
›› www.nationaljewish.org
National Oceanic
and Atmospheric
Administration
Government
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration seeks to understand and predict
climate changes and conserve coastal ecosystems. It uses cutting-edge research and high-tech
instrumentation to provide citizens, planners, and emergency managers reliable information when
they need it.
›› www.noaa.gov
National Rural
Health Association
Nonprofit
The National Rural Health Association is a national membership organization with more than
20,000 members. The association’s goal is to provide leadership on rural health issues through
advocacy, communications, education, and research.
›› www.ruralhealthweb.org
New York-
Presbyterian
Health Care Organization
New York-Presbyterian is an academic health care delivery system that seeks to provide
compassionate care and service to patients in the New York metropolitan area.
›› www.nyp.org
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

43

NAME
DESCRIPTION
North Carolina
COPD Taskforce
Advocacy
The North Carolina Taskforce is composed of groups across the Carolinas. Together they provide
resources to health professionals and individuals working on behalf of COPD patients. The
Taskforce annually sponsors a COPD Symposium focused on implementing a state COPD strategic
plan.
›› www.uscopdcoalition.org/StateCoalitions/NorthCarolina.aspx
Northwest Hospital
Health Care Organization
Northwest Hospital is a community hospital that serves the health care needs of northwest
Baltimore in Maryland. Northwest Hospital’s Division of Pulmonary Medicine offers broad-based
consultation, diagnosis, and treatment in pulmonary diseases.
›› www.lifebridgehealth.org
Novartis
Industry
Novartis is a health care company based in Switzerland that works to find health care solutions
for patients worldwide. It uses science-based innovation to improve areas of health care and the
practice of medicine.
›› www.novartis.com
Olmsted Medical
Center
Health Care Organization
Olmsted Medical Center offers cardiopulmonary rehabilitation services that are certified by the
American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation. The center has been
providing care to patients for 65 years.
›› www.olmmed.org
Pen Bay Medical
Center
Health Care Organization
Pen Bay Medical Center is the largest community hospital in Midcoast Maine. Providing patient
care in multiple medical settings, including clinics and a retirement community, the nonprofit
center has a staff of more than 100 physicians and 1,500 health care professionals.
›› www.penbayhealthcare.org
Propeller Health
Industry
Propeller Health aims to help people with asthma and COPD live better lives by minimizing the
daily impact of their symptoms and connecting them to their physicians, environment, and
community. With sensor-connected inhalers, digital interfaces, mobile spirometers, and real-time
education, participants can receive personal guidance to improve self-management, and clinicians
can receive data to inform selection of the optimal therapy for each individual.
›› www.propellerhealth.com
Pulmonary
Horizons, Inc.
Health Care Organization
Pulmonary Horizons provides patient-centered education in its treatment and management of
those diagnosed with COPD. The organization partners with the National Lung Health Education
Program and Right2Breathe.
›› www.pulmonaryhorizons.org
Pulmonary Wellness
Rehabilitation
Center
Health Care Organization
The Pulmonary Wellness Rehabilitation Center was founded in 1998 to provide wellness,
rehabilitation, and education programs for people living with pulmonary disease. The Center helps
empower patients by teaching them how to lessen and reverse the effects of their respiratory
disease and to effectively manage associated symptoms.
›› www.pulmonarywellness.com
Reading Health
System
Health Care Organization
Reading Health System provides health care to the community, promotes health and education,
and participates in clinical research.
›› www.readinghealth.org
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

44

NAME
DESCRIPTION
Respiratory Health
Association
Nonprofit
The Respiratory Health Association specializes in asthma, COPD, and air quality through research,
education, and advocacy activities. Founded in 1906 in Chicago, the group promotes ways to keep
lungs healthy, fights lung disease, and hosts educational events for health care providers.
›› www.lungchicago.org
Right2Breathe®
Nonprofit
Right2Breathe® was created by two automotive enthusiasts to help improve the quality of life
for those who live with respiratory diseases. Right2Breathe® provides awareness campaigns,
education, and free COPD screenings at events across the country.
›› www.right2breathe.org
Sanford Health
Health Care Organization
Sanford Health is a network of 43 hospitals and nearly 250 clinics in nine states and three
countries. Its pulmonology division specializes in diagnosing and treating respiratory tract and
lung disease. The staff works with primary care specialists to provide advanced diagnosis and
treatment and management of lung conditions and diseases.
›› www.sanfordhealth.org
Social Security
Administration
Government
The Social Security Administration provides financial benefits, tools, and information to help
support people through all stages of life.
›› www.ssa.gov
Society for
Women’s Health
Research
Health Care Professional
Association
The Society for Women’s Health Research is a nonprofit based in Washington, D.C., that is
dedicated to improving women’s health through science, advocacy, and education.
›› www.swhr.org
Temple Lung Center
Academic
Temple Lung Center’s team of pulmonary specialists offers advanced treatment options for
respiratory conditions, including COPD. Temple Lung Center is located in Philadelphia.
›› www.pulmonary.templehealth.org
Teva
Industry
Teva is a pharmaceutical company that seeks to increase access to high-quality health care
for people across the globe by developing, producing, and marketing generic drugs. Based in
Israel, Teva was established in 1901 and produces more than 64 million prescription tablets at 66
manufacturing facilities in 60 countries.
›› www.tevapharm.com
The UNC Medical
Center
Academic
The UNC Medical Center is an academic medical center and part of the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill. The center’s pulmonary care program addresses a wide range of conditions
and treatments, including COPD. UNC has an Obstructive Lung Diseases Clinical and Translational
Research Center, where specialists care for COPD patients and conduct clinical research on COPD.
UNC also provides pulmonary rehabilitation and smoking cessation support to patients suffering
from pulmonary diseases.
›› www.med.unc.edu
The University of
Chicago Asthma
and COPD Center
Academic
The University of Chicago Asthma and COPD Center is dedicated to the care of asthma and COPD
patients. Its respiratory disease specialists provide a range of services to help manage asthma and
COPD.
›› asthma.bsd.uchicago.edu
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

45

NAME
DESCRIPTION
The University of
Illinois Hospital &
Health Sciences
System
Academic
The University of Illinois Hospital & Health Sciences System is an academic facility that is part of
the University of Illinois at Chicago. It has a pulmonary outpatient clinic for the treatment and care
of patients with respiratory diseases.
›› www.hospital.uillinois.edu
The University of
Kentucky Medical
Center
Academic
The University of Kentucky Medical Center is an academic health care center established in 1957
on the Lexington campus of Kentucky’s flagship university. The faculty, students, and staff strive
for excellence in education, patient care, research, and community service.
›› www.mc.uky.edu
The University of
Michigan Health
System
Academic
The University of Michigan Health System is a health care system and academic medical center
made up of hospitals, health care centers, and clinics throughout Michigan. Its vision is to achieve
excellence in medical education and research and provide quality patient care.
›› www.med.umich.edu
Theravance
Biopharma
Industry
Theravance Biopharma is a biopharmaceutical company with the mission to create medicines that
make a difference in the lives of patients suffering from serious illness like COPD. Theravance has a
history of commitment to the respiratory and COPD community and has active research programs
in the respiratory arena.
›› www.theravance.com
U.S. COPD Coalition
Advocacy
The U.S. COPD Coalition is a nonprofit organization made up of patient organizations, health
professional organizations, individuals, and government agencies that work together to improve
the care of individuals affected by COPD.
›› www.uscopdcoalition.org
University of Texas
Medical Branch
Academic
The University of Texas Medical Branch, opened in 1891, is an academic health and sciences center
with schools for medical, nursing, and health professionals; a research facility; and a network of
clinics. The University of Texas Medical Branch is part of the Texas Medical Center and provides a
range of primary and specialized care.
›› www.utmb.edu
Washington
Hospital Center
Health Care Organization
The Washington Hospital Center is a nonprofit, 926-bed academic medical center in Washington,
D.C. Its team of pulmonary experts treats patients with a range of pulmonary conditions, from
acute illnesses to chronic respiratory diseases like COPD.
›› www.medstarwashington.org
Weill Cornell
Medicine
Academic
Weill Cornell Medicine is a clinical and medical research center affiliated with New York-
Presbyterian Hospital. Founded in 1898, the center is known for its breakthrough discoveries
in biomedical research and patient care. It is a major hub for state-of-the-art technologies and
the pursuit of scientific discovery and life-saving therapies. It offers access to internationally
recognized physicians from all fields of medicine.
›› www.weill.cornell.edu
Western Michigan
University Homer
Stryker M.D. School
of Medicine
Academic
Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine is a collaboration between
Western Michigan University and Kalamazoo’s two teaching hospitals, Borgess Health and Bronson
Healthcare.
›› www.wmich.edu
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

46

GLOSSARY
TERM
DEFINITION
Access to care
Access to care means having the timely use of personal health services to achieve the best health
outcomes.
Adherence
Adherence, or taking medications correctly, is generally defined as the extent to which patients take
medication as prescribed by their doctors. This involves factors such as getting prescriptions filled,
remembering to take medication on time, and understanding the directions.
Agency for
Healthcare
Research and
Quality (AHRQ)
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s (AHRQ) mission is to produce evidence to make
health care safer, higher quality, more accessible, equitable, and affordable, and to work within
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and with other partners to make sure that the
evidence is understood and used.
Agency for
Healthcare
Research and
Quality’s National
Guideline
Clearinghouse
(AHRQ NGC)
The National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC) supports AHRQ’s mission to produce evidence to
make health care safer, higher quality, more accessible, equitable, and affordable by providing
objective, detailed information on clinical practice guidelines, and to further their dissemination,
implementation, and use in order to inform health care decisions.
Air sacs
Air sacs, also called alveoli, are a part of the lung that form at the end of the bronchioles. When air
reaches the air sacs, oxygen passes through the air sac walls into the blood in the capillaries. The
airways and air sacs are elastic (stretchy). When you breathe in, each air sac fills up with air like a
small balloon. When you breathe out, the air sacs deflate and the air goes out. There are about 300
million alveoli in a normal lung.
Alpha-1
antitrypsin (AAT)
deficiency
Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency is an inherited condition that raises the risk for lung and liver
disease. AAT is a protein produced by the liver that protects the lungs. If the AAT proteins are not
the correct shape, they get stuck in the liver cells and cannot reach the lungs.
Arterial blood gas
test
Arterial blood gas tests measure how much oxygen and carbon dioxide are in the blood. They also
determine the pH, or how acidic or basic, the blood is.
Behavioral
Risk Factor
Surveillance
System (BRFSS)
The Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) is the nation’s premier system of telephone
surveys that collect state data about U.S. residents regarding their health-related risk behaviors,
chronic health conditions, and use of preventive services. Established in 1984 with 15 states, the
BRFSS now collects data in all 50 states, as well as the District of Columbia and three U.S. territories.
The BRFSS completes more than 400,000 adult interviews each year, making it the largest
continuously conducted health survey system in the world.
Biomarker
A biomarker refers to a broad subcategory of medical signs — that is, objective indications of
medical states observed from outside the patient — which can be measured accurately and
reproducibly. Medical signs stand in contrast to medical symptoms, which are limited to those
indications of health or illness perceived by patients themselves.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

47

TERM
DEFINITION
Bronchial tubes
The bronchial tubes, or bronchi, are two tubes that branch off the trachea, or windpipe. Bronchial
tubes carry air to the lungs. The most common problem with the bronchi is bronchitis, an
inflammation of the tubes.
Bronchitis
Bronchitis is an inflammation of the bronchial tubes. It causes a cough that often brings up mucus
and can also cause shortness of breath, wheezing, a low fever, and chest tightness. There are two
main types of bronchitis: acute and chronic.
Care continuum
Care continuum is a concept involving an integrated system of care that guides and tracks a patient
over time through a comprehensive array of health services.
Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention
(CDC)
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is the nation’s health protection agency.
The CDC conducts critical science and provides health information that protects the U.S. against
expensive and dangerous health threats, and responds when these arise.
Centers for
Medicare &
Medicaid Services
(CMS)
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is part of the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS). Its programs include Medicare, Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program,
and the Health Insurance Marketplace.
Chest CT scan
A chest CT scan is a more detailed type of chest X-ray. This painless imaging test takes many
detailed pictures, called slices, of the lungs and the inside of the chest. Computers can combine
these pictures to create three-dimensional (3D) models to help show the size, shape, and position
of the lungs and structures in the chest. A chest CT scan can also help determine the cause of
lung symptoms such as shortness of breath or chest pain, or check to see if a patient has certain
lung problems such as a tumor, excess fluid around the lungs (called pleural effusion), pulmonary
embolism, emphysema, tuberculosis, and pneumonia.
Chest X-ray
A chest X-ray is a fast and painless imaging test that uses certain electromagnetic waves to
create pictures of the structures in and around the chest. This test can help diagnose and monitor
conditions such as pneumonia, heart failure, lung cancer, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, and lung tissue
scarring, called fibrosis. Doctors may use chest X-rays to see how well certain treatments are
working and to check for complications after certain procedures or surgeries.
Chronic
condition
A chronic condition is a condition, disease, sign, or symptom that lasts persistently, recurs frequently,
or worsens progressively over a long time.
Chronic lower
respiratory
disease
Chronic lower respiratory disease is a disease that affects the lungs, including COPD.
Clinical quality
measures (CQMs)
Clinical quality measures (CQMs) are tools that help measure and track the quality of health care
services provided by eligible professionals, eligible hospitals, and critical access hospitals within
our health care system. These measures use data associated with providers’ ability to deliver high-
quality care or relate to long-term goals for quality health care.
Community health
needs assessment
(CHNA) survey
Community health needs assessment (CHNA), or a community health assessment (CHA), refers to a
state, tribal, local, or territorial health assessment that identifies key health needs and issues through
systematic, comprehensive data collection and analysis.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

48

TERM
DEFINITION
Comorbidity
Comorbidity describes two or more disorders or illnesses occurring in the same person. They can
occur at the same time or one after the other. Comorbidity also implies interactions between the
illnesses that can worsen the course of both.
Continuing
medical education
(CME)
Continuing medical education (CME) is the process by which family physicians and other health
professionals engage in activities designed to support their continuing professional development.
Activities are derived from multiple instructional domains, are learner centered, and support the
ability of those professionals to provide high-quality, comprehensive, and continuous patient care
and service to the public and their profession.
COPDGene
COPDGene is a multicenter observational study designed to identify genetic factors associated with
COPD.
Culturally
appropriate
services
Culturally appropriate services are broadly defined as care and services that are respectful of and
responsive to the cultural and linguistic needs of all individuals.
Department of
Defense (DoD)
The mission of the Department of Defense (DoD) is to provide the military forces needed to deter
war and to protect the security of the United States.
Disability
A disability is any condition of the body or mind (impairment) that makes it more difficult for the
person with the condition to do certain activities (activity limitation) and interact with the world
around them (participation restrictions).
Disparities
Disparities refer to great differences in health outcomes between populations. Race or ethnicity, sex,
sexual identity, age, disability, socioeconomic status, and geographic location all contribute to an
individual’s ability to achieve good health.
Dyspnea
Dyspnea is shortness of breath, breathlessness, or difficulty breathing.
Elasticity
Elasticity refers to the “stretchy” quality of the airways and air sacs that allows them to retain
their shape.
Electronic health
record (EHR)
An electronic health record (EHR) is a digital version of a patient’s paper chart. EHRs are real-time,
patient-centered records that make information available instantly and securely to authorized users.
Emphysema
Emphysema is a type of COPD involving damage to the air sacs (alveoli) in the lungs. As a result, the
body does not get the oxygen it needs. Emphysema makes it hard for an individual to catch his or
her breath. It may also cause chronic coughing and trouble breathing during exercise.
Epidemiology
Epidemiology is the study of the distribution (frequency, pattern) and causes and risk factors
of health-related states and events (not just diseases) in specified populations, including
neighborhoods, schools, cities, states, countries, and global.
Etiology
Etiology is the cause or origin of disease.
Evidence-based
practices
Evidence-based practices are the conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence
when making decisions about the care of the individual patient. This involves integrating individual
clinical expertise with the best available external clinical evidence from systematic research.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

49

TERM
DEFINITION
Exacerbations
Exacerbations refer to a worsening of COPD. About half of COPD exacerbations are caused or
triggered by bacterial and viral infections (colds, especially from rhinovirus), but air pollution can
also contribute to the beginning of an exacerbation.
Genomics
Genomics is the study of genes and their functions, and related techniques.
Guidelines-based
care
Guidelines-based care is care based on systematically developed statements to assist practitioner
and patient decisions about appropriate health care for specific clinical circumstances.
Health care cost:
direct vs. indirect
Direct costs are those costs borne by the health care system, community, and patients’ families in
addressing an illness.
Indirect costs are mainly productivity losses to society caused by the health problem or disease.
Health care
providers
Any organization (including an HMO, preferred provider organization, or group medical practice)
that provides health care services and follows a formal peer-review process for the purpose of
furthering quality health care.
Health indicators
Health indicators are measures of the health of people in a community, including rates of disease
such as COPD.
Health
information
technology (HIT)
Health information technology (HIT) is a broad concept that encompasses an array of technologies
to store, share, and analyze health information.
Health literacy
Health literacy is the degree to which individuals have the capacity to obtain, process, and
understand basic health information and services needed to make appropriate health decisions.
Health Resources
and Services
Administration
(HRSA)
The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) is an agency of the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services (HHS) and is the primary federal agency for improving health and
achieving health equity through access to quality services, a skilled health workforce and innovative
programs. HRSA’s programs provide health care to people who are geographically isolated and
economically or medically vulnerable.
Heterogeneity
Heterogeneity refers to something made up of elements or ingredients that are not alike.
Inhaled
treatments
Inhaled treatments for COPD patients refers to the two main methods of using inhaled medications,
including the use of an inhaler or the use of a nebulizer.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

50

TERM
DEFINITION
International
Classification of
Diseases (ICD)
The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is designed to promote international comparability
in the collection, processing, classification, and presentation of mortality statistics. This includes
providing a format for reporting causes of death on the death certificate. The reported conditions
are then translated into medical codes through use of the classification structure and the selection
and modification rules contained in the applicable revision of the ICD, published by the World Health
Organization (WHO). These coding rules improve the usefulness of mortality statistics by giving
preference to certain categories by consolidating conditions and by systematically selecting a single
cause of death from a reported sequence of conditions. The single selected cause for tabulation is
called the underlying cause of death, and the other reported causes are the non-underlying causes
of death. The combination of underlying and non-underlying causes is the multiple causes of death.
The ICD is currently in the Tenth Revision (ICD-10).
The International Classification of Diseases codes for COPD include: chronic bronchitis (ICD-9 codes
490-491), emphysema (ICD-9 code 492), bronchiectasis (ICD-9 code 494), and chronic airway
obstruction (ICD-9 code 496).
Linguistically
appropriate
services
Linguistically appropriate services are broadly defined as care and services that are respectful
of and responsive to the cultural and linguistic needs of all individuals.
Lower pulmonary
function
Lower pulmonary function is a measure of how much air an individual exhales, and how quickly
they exhale.
Lung function
tests
Lung function tests, or pulmonary function tests (PFTs), measure how well the lungs work. They
include tests that measure lung size and air flow, such as spirometry and lung volume tests. Other
tests measure how well gases, such as oxygen, get in and out of the blood. These tests include pulse
oximetry and arterial blood gas tests. Another pulmonary function test, called fractional exhaled
nitric oxide (FeNO), measures nitric oxide, which is a marker for inflammation in the lungs. One
or more of these tests may be used to diagnose lung and airway diseases, compare lung function
to expected levels of function, monitor if a patient’s disease is stable or worsening, and see if a
treatment is working.
Medicaid
Medicaid provides health coverage to millions of Americans, including eligible low-income adults,
children, pregnant women, elderly adults, and people with disabilities. Medicaid is administered by
states, according to federal requirements. The program is funded jointly by states and the federal
government.
Medicare
Medicare is the federal health insurance program for people who are 65 or older, certain younger
people with disabilities, and people with end-stage renal disease (ESRD), permanent kidney failure
requiring dialysis or a transplant.
Medicare
doughnut hole
The “doughnut hole” refers to a gap in prescription drug coverage under Medicare Part D.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

51

TERM
DEFINITION
Mortality rate
A mortality rate is a measure of the frequency of occurrence of death in a defined population during
a specified interval.
Multidisciplinary
team-based
approach
Multidisciplinary team-based approach broadens delivery of care by expanding the health care team
to include several types of health care professionals. Collaborative teams vary according to patients’
needs, patient load, organizational constraints, resources, clinical setting, geographic location, and
professional skills.
National
Ambulatory
Medical Care
Survey (NAMCS)
The National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) is a national survey designed to meet the
need for objective, reliable information about the provision and use of ambulatory medical care
services in the United States. Findings are based on a sample of visits to nonfederal employed,
office-based physicians who are primarily engaged in direct patient care.
National Center
for Health
Statistics (NCHS)
The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) compiles statistical information to guide actions
and policies to improve health.
National Health
and Nutrition
Examination
Survey (NHANES)
The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) is a program of studies designed
to assess the health and nutritional status of adults and children in the United States. The survey is
unique in that it combines interviews and physical examinations.
National Health
Interview Survey
(NHIS)
The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) has monitored the health of the nation since 1957.
NHIS data includes a broad range of health topics that are collected through personal household
interviews.
National Heart,
Lung, and Blood
Institute (NHLBI)
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health, plans,
conducts, and supports research related to the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of
heart, blood vessel, lung, and blood diseases; and sleep disorders. The Institute also administers
national health education campaigns on women and heart disease, COPD, and other topics.
National Institute
for Occupational
Safety and Health
(NIOSH)
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) is part of the U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS). It has the mandate to assure “every man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working
conditions and to preserve our human resources.”
Online
communities
Online communities are Internet-based platforms that unite either a group of patients, a group of
professionals, or a mixture of both. Members interact using modern communication technologies
such as blogs, chats, forums, and wikis.
Palliative care
The goal of palliative care is to help people with serious illnesses feel better. It prevents or treats
symptoms and side effects of the disease and treatment. Palliative care also treats emotional, social,
practical, and spiritual problems that illnesses can bring up. When the person feels better in these
areas, they have an improved quality of life.
Palliative care can be given at the same time as treatments meant to cure or treat the disease.
Palliative care may be given when the illness is diagnosed, throughout treatment, during follow-up,
and at the end of life.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

52

TERM
DEFINITION
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of a disease describes the mechanisms by which it develops, progresses, and
either persists or is resolved.
Patient registries
A patient registry is an organized system that uses observational study methods to collect uniform
data (clinical and other) to evaluate specified outcomes for a population defined by a particular
disease, condition, or exposure and that serves predetermined scientific, clinical, or policy
purpose(s).
Patient-centered
care
Patient-centered care is defined as health care that establishes a partnership among practitioners,
patients, and their families (when appropriate) to ensure that decisions respect patients’ wants,
needs, and preferences, and that patients have the education and support they need to make
decisions and participate in their own care.
Patient-centric
Patient-centric health care is health care that is relationship-based with an orientation toward the
whole person. Partnering with patients and their families requires understanding and respecting
each patient’s unique needs, culture, values, and preferences.
Pharmacological
Pharmacological refers to the science of drugs, including their composition, uses, and effect, or the
characteristics or properties of a drug, especially those that make it medically effective.
Phenotype
A phenotype is an individual’s observable trait, such as height, eye color, and blood type. The
genetic contribution to the phenotype is called the genotype. Some traits are largely determined by
the genotype, while other traits are largely determined by environmental factors.
Polypharmacy
Polypharmacy is an increase in the number of medications or the use of more medications than are
medically necessary. Polypharmacy is common in older ambulatory care, hospital, and nursing home
patients. Polypharmacy increases the risk of numerous negative health consequences in the elderly.
Population
surveillance
Population surveillance is the ongoing scrutiny of a population (general population, study
population, target population, etc.), generally using methods distinguished by their practicability,
uniformity, and frequently their rapidity, rather than by complete accuracy.
Precision
Medicine
Initiative®
Precision medicine is an emerging approach for disease prevention and treatment that takes into
account people’s individual variations in genes, environment, and lifestyle. The Precision Medicine
Initiative® will generate the scientific evidence needed to move the concept of precision medicine
into clinical practice.
Near term goals are focused on innovative clinical trials of targeted drugs for adult and pediatric
cancers, the use of combination therapies, and the expansion of knowledge to overcome drug
resistance. Longer term goals are the focus of the AllofUs effort to create a research cohort of more
than 1 million American volunteers. Participants will provide genetic data, biological samples, and
other information about their health. These data will be used by researchers to study a large range
of diseases, with the goals of better predicting disease risk, understanding how diseases occur, and
finding improved diagnosis and treatment strategies.
Prevalence
Prevalence is the proportion of a population which has (or had) a specific characteristic in a given time
period — in medicine, typically an illness, a condition, or a risk factor, such as depression or smoking.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

53

TERM
DEFINITION
Prognosis
The prognosis of a genetic condition includes its likely course, duration, and outcome. When health
professionals refer to the prognosis of a disease, they may also mean the chance of recovery;
however, most genetic conditions are lifelong and are managed rather than cured. COPD is
measured in stages with Stage 1 being very mild and Stage 4 being very severe.
Public health
nurse
A public health nurse works to assess the health and health care needs of a population in order to
identify subpopulations, families, and individuals who would benefit from health promotion or who
are at risk of illness, injury, disability, or premature death.
Pulmonary
rehabilitation
Pulmonary rehabilitation, also called pulmonary rehab or PR, is a broad program that helps improve
the well-being of people who have chronic (ongoing) breathing problems. For example, PR may
benefit people who have COPD, sarcoidosis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, or cystic fibrosis.
Smoker’s cough
Smoker’s cough is a type of coughing that may produce large amounts of mucus.
Smoking
cessation
Smoking cessation is the process of quitting smoking tobacco products.
Spirometry
Spirometry measures the rate of air flow and estimates lung size. For this test, a person breathes
multiple times, with regular and maximal effort, through a tube that is connected to a computer.
Some people feel lightheaded or tired from the required breathing effort.
Sputum
Sputum is mucus and other matter brought up from the lungs by coughing.
Subphenotype
A subphenotype identifies a subset of phenotype.
Subpopulations
and Intermediate
Outcome
Measures in
COPD Study
(SPIROMICS)
Subpopulations and Intermediate Outcome Measures in COPD Study (SPIROMICS) is a multi-
center observational study of COPD designed to guide future development of therapies for the
disease. This is done by providing robust criteria for sub-classifying COPD participants into groups
most likely to benefit from a given therapy during a clinical trial, thereby improving the chances of
successful outcome; and by identifying biomarkers/phenotypes that can be used as intermediate
outcomes to reliably predict clinical benefit during therapeutic trials, thus reducing costs.
T3/T4 research
T3/T4 research refers to a type of translational research. With T3 translational research, investigators
explore ways of applying recommendations or guidelines in general practice. T3 research yields
knowledge about how interventions work in real-world settings.
In T4 translational research, investigators study factors and interventions that influence the health of
populations. T4 research ultimately results in improved public and global health.
Telemedicine
Telemedicine allows health care providers to examine, diagnose, and treat patients using technology
like a phone, computer, or other device.
The Global
Initiative
for Chronic
Obstructive Lung
Disease (GOLD)
The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) is an initiative that works with
health care professionals and public health officials around the world to raise awareness of COPD
and to improve prevention and treatment of the disease.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

54

TERM
DEFINITION
The Health and
Medicine Division
(HMD) (Formerly
Institute of
Medicine)
The Health and Medicine Division (HMD) is a division of the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (the National Academies). HMD aims to help those in government and the
private sector make informed health decisions by providing evidence upon which they can rely.
Tobacco products
Tobacco products are defined as cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, and roll-your-
own tobacco. Smokeless tobacco refers to any snuff or chewing tobacco.
Trans-
governmental
Trans-governmental refers to cooperation based on loosely-structured, peer-to-peer ties developed
through frequent interaction rather than formal negotiation involving specialized domestic officials
directly interacting with each other.
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

55

56
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

REFERENCES
1.
Kochanek KD, Murphy SL, Xu JQ, Arias E. Mortality in the
United States, 2016. NCHS Data Brief, no 293. Hyattsville,
MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2017
2.
Anne G. Wheaton, Timothy J. Cunningham, Earl S. Ford,
MD, and Janet B. Croft., “Employment and activity
limitations among adults with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease  —  United States, 2013,” Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), 64 (11), pp. 289-
295 (March 7, 2015), Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC)
3.
David M. Mannino, Robert C. Gagnon, Thomas L. Petty,
and Eva Lydick., “Obstructive lung disease and low lung
function in adults in the United States: data from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1988-
1994.” Archives of Internal Medicine, 160 (11), pp. 1683-
1689 (June 12, 2000)
4.
Jiemin Ma, Elizabeth M. Ward, Rebecca L. Siegel, and
Ahmedin Jemal., “Temporal trends in mortality in the
United States, 1969-2013.” JAMA, 314 (16), pp.1731-1739
(October 27, 2015)
5.
MW Brault, J Hootman, CG Helmick, KA Theis, and
BS Armour., “Prevalence and most common causes
of disability among adults — United States, 2005,”
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), 58 (16),
pp. 421-426 (May 1, 2009), Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC)
6.
Earl S. Ford, Louise B. Murphy, Olga Khavjou, Wayne H.
Giles, James B. Holt, and Janet B. Croft., “Total and state-
specific medical and absenteeism costs of COPD among
adults aged ≥ 18 years in the United States for 2010 and
projections through 2020,” Chest, 147 (1), pp. 31-45
(January 2015)
7.
Earl S. Ford, Janet B. Croft, David M. Mannino, Anne G.
Wheaton, Xingyou Zhang, and Wayne H. Giles, “COPD
surveillance  —  United States, 1999-2011,” Chest, 144 (1),
pp. 284-305 (July 2013)
8.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), 2015.
9.
John Lewis, David P. Joyce, and Carol Shea-Porter
(U.S. House of Representatives)., Letter to: Dr. Thomas
R. Frieden (Director, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA) and Dr. Francis S. Collins
(Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).
2014 Nov 24. 1 leaf
10.	 Nicole M. Kosacz, Antonello Punturieri, Thomas L.
Croxton, Monique N. Ndenecho, James P. Kiley, Gail G.
Weinmann, Anne G. Wheaton, Earl S. Ford, Letitia R.
Presley-Cantrell, Janet B. Croft, and Wayne H. Giles.,
“Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease surveillance
among adults-United States, 2011,” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), 61 (46), pp. 938-943
(November 23, 2012), Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC)
11.	 The NAMCS, NHAMCS, and NHCS are beginning the
process of collecting EHRs, which will greatly increase
the number and content of available records.
12.	 Harvard Catalyst, The Harvard Clinical and Translational
Science Center; [reviewed and cited 2017 May] Available
at:  http://catalyst.harvard.edu/pathfinder/t3detail.html.

COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
57

AGE-ADJUSTED PREVALENCE OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE (COPD) AMONG ADULTS AGED ≥18 YEARS —
BEHAVIORAL RISK FACTOR SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM, UNITED STATES, 2015
State
COPD Prevalence
Alabama
9.9%
Alaska
4.1%
Arizona
5.8%
Arkansas
9.1%
California
4%
Colorado
4.2%
Connecticut
4.6%
Delaware
6.3%
District of Columbia
5.9%
Florida
6%
Georgia
6.7%
Hawaii
4.1%
Idaho
4.5%
Illinois
5.4%
Indiana
7.4%
Iowa
5.2%
Kansas
5.8%
Kentucky
11.2%
Louisiana
7.1%
Maine
7%
Maryland
5.8%
Massachusetts
5.3%
Michigan
6.9%
Minnesota
4.2%
Mississippi
7.2%
Missouri
7.9%
State
COPD Prevalence
Montana
5%
Nebraska
5%
Nevada
6.2%
New Hampshire
6.1%
New Jersey
4.6%
New Mexico
5.5%
New York
5.3%
North Carolina
7%
North Dakota
4.8%
Ohio
7.1%
Oklahoma
8.2%
Oregon
5.1%
Pennsylvania
6.2%
Rhode Island
5.7%
South Carolina
6.7%
South Dakota
5.2%
Tennessee
8.9%
Texas
5.1%
Utah
3.8%
Vermont
5.6%
Virginia
5.5%
Washington
5.8%
West Virginia
12%
Wisconsin
4.2%
Wyoming
6.8%
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
58

COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

59

THANK YOU
WE WOULD LIKE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THE
CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE ENTIRE COPD
COMMUNITY IN DEVELOPING THIS COPD
NATIONAL ACTION PLAN. COLLABORATION
ACROSS THIS COMMUNITY IS ESSENTIAL
TO THE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE PLAN.
60
COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN

TO LEARN MORE ABOUT THE COPD NATIONAL ACTION PLAN, VISIT
C O P D.N I H.gov
PUBLICATION NO. 17-HL-8031
AUGUST 2017
UPDATED FEBRUARY 2018
#COPDActionPlan
