=== Cor Pulmonale ===
Fonte: StatPearls/NCBI Bookshelf
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK430739/
Licenca: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
Doenca: dpoc | Idioma: en
----------------------------------------------------------------------

NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 Jan-.
StatPearls [Internet].
Show details
Treasure Island (FL):
StatPearls Publishing
; 2026 Jan-.

Cor Pulmonale
Daniel M. Garrison
;
Venkata Satish Pendela
;
Jawedulhadi Memon
.
Author Information and Affiliations
Authors
Daniel M. Garrison
;
Venkata Satish Pendela
1
;
Jawedulhadi Memon
2
.
Affiliations
1
Rochester General Hospital
2
King Fahad Hospital
Last Update:
August 8, 2023
.
Continuing Education Activity
Cor pulmonale is a Latin word that means "pulmonary heart," its definition varies, and presently, there is no consensual definition. Cor pulmonale can be defined as an alteration in the structure (e.g., hypertrophy or dilatation) and function of the right ventricle (RV) of the heart caused by a primary disorder of the respiratory system resulting in pulmonary hypertension. Right-sided heart failure secondary to left-sided heart failure, or congenital heart disease is not considered cor pulmonale. This activity reviews the causes, pathophysiology, and diagnosis of cor pulmonale and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

Objectives:

Review the causes of cor pulmonale.
Describe the pathophysiology of cor pulmonale.
Summarize the treatment options for cor pulmonale.
Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by cor pulmonale.

Access free multiple choice questions on this topic.

Introduction
Cor pulmonale is a Latin word that means "pulmonary heart," its definition varies, and presently, there is no consensual definition.
Cor pulmonale can be defined as an alteration in the structure (e.g., hypertrophy or dilatation) and function of the right ventricle (RV) of the heart caused by a primary disorder of the respiratory system resulting in pulmonary hypertension.
Right-sided heart failure secondary to left-sided heart failure, or congenital heart disease is not considered cor pulmonale.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Etiology
Pulmonary hypertension is associated with diseases of the lung (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, interstitial lung disease), vasculature (e.g., idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension), upper airway (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea), or chest wall (e.g., kyphoscoliosis). Diseases that damage lungs are autoimmune (e.g., scleroderma), cystic fibrosis, and obesity hypoventilation syndrome are also lead to pulmonary hypertension.
Massive pulmonary embolism is the most common cause of acute cor pulmonale.
A massive pulmonary embolism can mimic a myocardial infarction with elevated troponins, ST changes, chest pain, and shortness of breath.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the most common cause of cor pulmonale. The severity of cor pulmonale appears to correlate with the magnitude of hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and airflow obstruction.
In most patients with COPD, cor pulmonale tends to be accompanied by mild pulmonary hypertension (i.e., mean pulmonary artery pressure 40 mmHg or less).
Epidemiology
The exact prevalence of cor pulmonale is difficult to determine, as physical examination and routine tests are relatively insensitive for the detection of pulmonary hypertension and RV dysfunction. Cor pulmonale is estimated to account for 6% to 7% percent of all types of adult heart disease in the United States. The incidence of cor pulmonale is widely variant among countries. It depends on air pollution, the prevalence of cigarette smoking and other risk factors for various lung diseases.
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of cor pulmonale is a result of increased right-sided filling pressures from pulmonary hypertension that is associated with diseases of the lung.
[5]
[6]
[7]
Under normal physiologic conditions, the right ventricle pumps against a low-resistance circuit.
Normal pulmonary vascular resistance is approximately one-tenth of the resistance of the systemic arteries. Chronic hypoxemia leading to chronic vasoconstriction produces smooth muscle proliferation in small pulmonary arteries. Hypoxemia produces changes in vascular mediators such as Nitric Oxide, Endothelin1 (ET1) and platelet-derived growth factors (PDGF A and B). Nitric oxide is a vasodilator; hypoxemia reduces endothelial cell production of nitric oxide and results in impaired smooth ms relaxation.
The initial pathophysiologic event in the production of cor pulmonale is an elevation of pulmonary vascular resistance. As the resistance increases, the pulmonary arterial pressure rises, and the right ventricular work increases leading to right ventricular enlargement (e.g., thickening, dilation, or both).
History and Physical
Symptoms may include dyspnea on exertion (most common), fatigue, lethargy, exertional syncope and exertional chest pain, abdominal edema or distension, and lower extremity edema.
The clinical signs occur late, being observed at an advanced stage of the disease far after the development of pulmonary hypertension.
Physical findings may include:
Jugular venous distension: Prominent jugular V wave, indicating the presence of tricuspid regurgitation
Peripheral (ankle) edema: The best sign of RHF, but it is not specific and can arise from other causes
Cardiovascular: Palpable left the parasternal lift, loud S2 (accentuation of the pulmonary component of the second heart sound) narrow splitting of S2, a holosystolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation at the left lower sternal border, right-sided S4 heart sound
Abdomen: Hepatomegaly, ascites.
Evaluation
Laboratory investigations are directed toward defining the potential underlying etiologies as well as evaluating the complications of cor pulmonale.
[8]
[9]
[10]
These include:
Chest radiograph: Enlargement of the pulmonary artery may be seen, cardiomegaly is confined predominantly, if not exclusively, to the right ventricle and other features may be detected according to the cause
Electrocardiogram: Shows features of right ventricular hypertrophy/enlargement
Doppler echocardiography (most practical but heavily operator dependent): The non-invasive diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension is presently based on echocardiography. Continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography allows the calculation of the trans tricuspid pressure gradient from the peak velocity of the tricuspid regurgitant jet
Chest CT angiography to rule out pulmonary thromboembolism as a cause. Main pulmonary artery diameter measurements greater than 29 mm have a sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 75% for the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension
Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scanning can be particularly useful in evaluating patients with cor pulmonale, especially if pulmonary hypertension is due to chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH)
MRI: This noninvasive technique yields highly accurate dimensions of the right ventricle but is not routinely used
PFTs and 6-minute walk test for assessment of the severity of lung disease and exercise capacity respectively
A right heart cath is a gold standard for diagnosis, assessment of Pulmonary hypertension severity. Right heart catheterization reveals evidence of right ventricular (RV) dysfunction (mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) above 25 mmHg) without left ventricular (LV) dysfunction. Differentiating left-sided from the right-sided disease includes measuring the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), which is an estimation of left atrial pressure. Thus, RV dysfunction is also defined as having a PCWP below 15 mmHg.
Treatment / Management
Treatment is aimed primarily at treating the underlying condition; the aim is improving oxygenation and right ventricular (RV) function by increasing RV contractility and decreasing pulmonary vasoconstriction.
Oxygen therapy relieves hypoxemic pulmonary vasoconstriction, which then improves cardiac output, lessens sympathetic vasoconstriction, alleviates tissue hypoxemia, and improves renal perfusion.
Diuretics are used to decrease the elevated right ventricular (RV) filling volume in patients with chronic cor pulmonale.
The use of cardiac glycosides, such as digitalis in patients with cor pulmonale has been controversial, and the beneficial effect of these drugs is not as obvious as in the setting of left heart failure. Nevertheless, studies have confirmed a modest effect of digitalis on the failing right ventricle in patients with chronic cor pulmonale.
Differential Diagnosis
Atrial myxoma
Blood disorders that are associated with increased blood viscosity
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Congestive (biventricular) heart failure
Constrictive pericarditis
High-output heart failure
Infiltrative cardiomyopathies
Interstitial lung disease (ILD)
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
Primary pulmonic stenosis
Pulmonary hypertension
Right heart failure due to congenital heart diseases
Right heart failure due to right ventricular infarction
Ventricular septal defect
Prognosis
Prognosis:
The prognosis of cor pulmonale is variable-dependant upon the underlying pathology. The development of cor pulmonale as a result of a primary pulmonary disease usually heralds a poorer prognosis.
Highlights:
Cor pulmonale is right ventricular dysfunction from long-standing pulmonary HTN.
All primary lung diseases can cause PHTN and thus cor pulmonale.
Dyspnea on exertion is the most common symptom.
Primarily, treatment aims to treat the underlying condition.
Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes
The diagnosis and management of cor pulmonale are by an interprofessional team that consists of a cardiologist, internist, radiologist, pulmonologist and intensivist. The treatment is aimed primarily at treating the underlying condition; the aim is improving oxygenation and right ventricular (RV) function by increasing RV contractility and decreasing pulmonary vasoconstriction. The outlook for patients with cor pulmonale is dependent on the primary condition, which if not controlled, leads to a poor outcome. Most of the patients who do recover have a long protracted course marked by the relapse of symptoms. The quality of life for most patients is poor.
[11]
(Level V)
Review Questions

Access free multiple choice questions on this topic.

Click here for a simplified version.

Comment on this article.

References
1.
Vieira JL, Távora FRF, Sobral MGV, Vasconcelos GG, Almeida GPL, Fernandes JR, da Escóssia Marinho LL, de Mendonça Trompieri DF, De Souza Neto JD, Mejia JAC. Chagas Cardiomyopathy in Latin America Review.
Curr Cardiol Rep.
2019 Feb 12;
21
(2):8.
[
PubMed
: 30747287
]
2.
George PM, Patterson CM, Reed AK, Thillai M. Lung transplantation for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Lancet Respir Med.
2019 Mar;
7
(3):271-282.
[
PubMed
: 30738856
]
3.
Niwa K. Aortic dilatation in complex congenital heart disease.
Cardiovasc Diagn Ther.
2018 Dec;
8
(6):725-738.
[
PMC free article
: PMC6331370
] [
PubMed
: 30740320
]
4.
Neidenbach R, Niwa K, Oto O, Oechslin E, Aboulhosn J, Celermajer D, Schelling J, Pieper L, Sanftenberg L, Oberhoffer R, de Haan F, Weyand M, Achenbach S, Schlensak C, Lossnitzer D, Nagdyman N, von Kodolitsch Y, Kallfelz HC, Pittrow D, Bauer UMM, Ewert P, Meinertz T, Kaemmerer H. Improving medical care and prevention in adults with congenital heart disease-reflections on a global problem-part II: infective endocarditis, pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary arterial hypertension and aortopathy.
Cardiovasc Diagn Ther.
2018 Dec;
8
(6):716-724.
[
PMC free article
: PMC6331381
] [
PubMed
: 30740319
]
5.
Lee S. Comprehensive Nursing Management for Valvular Disease.
Crit Care Nurs Clin North Am.
2019 Mar;
31
(1):31-38.
[
PubMed
: 30736933
]
6.
Yoon YS, Jin M, Sin DD. Accelerated lung aging and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Expert Rev Respir Med.
2019 Apr;
13
(4):369-380.
[
PubMed
: 30735057
]
7.
Smolders VF, Zodda E, Quax PHA, Carini M, Barberà JA, Thomson TM, Tura-Ceide O, Cascante M. Metabolic Alterations in Cardiopulmonary Vascular Dysfunction.
Front Mol Biosci.
2018;
5
:120.
[
PMC free article
: PMC6349769
] [
PubMed
: 30723719
]
8.
Patel S, Cole AD, Nolan CM, Barker RE, Jones SE, Kon S, Cairn J, Loebinger M, Wilson R, Man WD. Pulmonary rehabilitation in bronchiectasis: a propensity-matched study.
Eur Respir J.
2019 Jan;
53
(1)
[
PubMed
: 30578381
]
9.
Balsam P, Ozierański K, Kapłon-Cieślicka A, Borodzicz S, Tymińska A, Peller M, Marchel M, Crespo-Leiro MG, Maggioni AP, Drożdż J, Opolski G, Grabowski M. Differences in clinical characteristics and 1-year outcomes of hospitalized patients with heart failure in ESC-HF Pilot and ESC-HF-LT registries.
Pol Arch Intern Med.
2019 Feb 28;
129
(2):106-116.
[
PubMed
: 30648697
]
10.
van Cleemput J, Sonaglioni A, Wuyts WA, Bengus M, Stauffer JL, Harari S. Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis for Cardiologists: Differential Diagnosis, Cardiovascular Comorbidities, and Patient Management.
Adv Ther.
2019 Feb;
36
(2):298-317.
[
PMC free article
: PMC6824347
] [
PubMed
: 30554332
]
11.
Kim M, Tillis W, Patel P, Davis RM, Asche CV. Association between asthma/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome and healthcare utilization among the US adult population.
Curr Med Res Opin.
2019 Jul;
35
(7):1191-1196.
[
PubMed
: 30612470
]

Disclosure:
Daniel Garrison declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.

Disclosure:
Venkata Satish Pendela declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.

Disclosure:
Jawedulhadi Memon declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.

Copyright
© 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

This book is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
(

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

), which permits others to distribute the work, provided that the article is not altered or used commercially. You are not required to obtain permission to distribute this article, provided that you credit the author and journal.

Bookshelf ID: NBK430739
PMID:
28613490
